



Download Request: Select Items: 1-119
Time Of Request: Sunday, November 25, 2018  13:31:42
Send To:

311G, 2152
UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW LIBRARY
HILLHEAD STREET
GLASGOW, GBR G12 8QE


Terms: (date(>=2018-05-16 and <=2018-05-23) and (Angela Merkel) and not
(type(web)))


Source: The Independent (United Kingdom);The Sunday Tim...
Combined Source: The Independent (United Kingdom);The Sunday Tim...
Project ID: None



                               1 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                                  Daily Mirror

                             May 23, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

TUC boss: PM has only met with me once

BYLINE: BEN GLAZE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 108 words


TUC chief Frances O'Grady revealed yesterday that Theresa May has met her just
once since she became Prime Minister.

The boss of Britain's unions told a Westminster lunch: "I have reflected on the
fact I have met Angela Merkel, the President of Ireland (and) various others
many more times.

"There are countries where it is recognised it is important to listen not just
to business but to working people too. We represent six million of them."

But she said she has met with Chancellor Philip Hammond and Brexit Secretary
David Davis on a "semi-regular basis".

Mrs May's spokesman said: "The Prime Minister meets regularly with a range of
industry leaders."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: SNUBBED Frances O'Grady

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2018 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                               2 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                                  Daily Mirror

                             May 23, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                Northern Ireland

TUC boss: PM has only met with me once

BYLINE: BEN GLAZE

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 108 words


TUC chief Frances O'Grady revealed yesterday that Theresa May has met her just
once since she became Prime Minister.

The boss of Britain's unions told a Westminster lunch: "I have reflected on the
fact I have met Angela Merkel, the President of Ireland (and) various others
many more times.

"There are countries where it is recognised it is important to listen not just
to business but to working people too. We represent six million of them."

But she said she has met with Chancellor Philip Hammond and Brexit Secretary
David Davis on a "semi-regular basis".

Mrs May's spokesman said: "The Prime Minister meets regularly with a range of
industry leaders."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: SNUBBED Frances O'Grady

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2018 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                               3 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 23, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

Zuckerberg apology tour hits Europe

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 110 words


Mark Zuckerberg, founder and chief executive of Facebook, arrives yesterday at
the European Parliament, where he made his latest attempt to draw a line under a
data leak scandal that has shaken the social media network.

Mr Zuckerberg echoed his apology last month to the US Congress, saying it had
"become clear over the last couple of years that we haven't done enough to
prevent the tools we've built from being used for harm as well".

Manfred Weber, leader of the centreright in the parliament and an ally of Angela
Merkel, Germany's chancellor, asked why Facebook should not be broken up. Mr
Zuckerberg replied: "We exist in a very competitive space." Reuters

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Yves Herman/Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                               4 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 23, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

Zuckerberg apology tour hits Europe

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 110 words


Mark Zuckerberg, founder and chief executive of Facebook, arrives yesterday at
the European Parliament, where he made his latest attempt to draw a line under a
data leak scandal that has shaken the social media network.

Mr Zuckerberg echoed his apology last month to the US Congress, saying it had
"become clear over the last couple of years that we haven't done enough to
prevent the tools we've built from being used for harm as well".

Manfred Weber, leader of the centreright in the parliament and an ally of Angela
Merkel, Germany's chancellor, asked why Facebook should not be broken up. Mr
Zuckerberg replied: "We exist in a very competitive space." Reuters

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Yves Herman/Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                               5 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 23, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                              Middle East Edition

Zuckerberg apology tour hits Europe

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 110 words


Mark Zuckerberg, founder and chief executive of Facebook, arrives yesterday at
the European Parliament, where he made his latest attempt to draw a line under a
data leak scandal that has shaken the social media network.

Mr Zuckerberg echoed his apology last month to the US Congress, saying it had
"become clear over the last couple of years that we haven't done enough to
prevent the tools we've built from being used for harm as well".

Manfred Weber, leader of the centreright in the parliament and an ally of Angela
Merkel, Germany's chancellor, asked why Facebook should not be broken up. Mr
Zuckerberg replied: "We exist in a very competitive space." Reuters

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Yves Herman/Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                               6 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 23, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Zuckerberg apology tour hits Europe

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 110 words


Mark Zuckerberg, founder and chief executive of Facebook, arrives yesterday at
the European Parliament, where he made his latest attempt to draw a line under a
data leak scandal that has shaken the social media network.

Mr Zuckerberg echoed his apology last month to the US Congress, saying it had
"become clear over the last couple of years that we haven't done enough to
prevent the tools we've built from being used for harm as well".

Manfred Weber, leader of the centreright in the parliament and an ally of Angela
Merkel, Germany's chancellor, asked why Facebook should not be broken up. Mr
Zuckerberg replied: "We exist in a very competitive space." Reuters

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Yves Herman/Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                               7 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 23, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

Zuckerberg apology tour hits Europe

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 110 words


Mark Zuckerberg, founder and chief executive of Facebook, arrives yesterday at
the European Parliament, where he made his latest attempt to draw a line under a
data leak scandal that has shaken the social media network.

Mr Zuckerberg echoed his apology last month to the US Congress, saying it had
"become clear over the last couple of years that we haven't done enough to
prevent the tools we've built from being used for harm as well".

Manfred Weber, leader of the centreright in the parliament and an ally of Angela
Merkel, Germany's chancellor, asked why Facebook should not be broken up. Mr
Zuckerberg replied: "We exist in a very competitive space." Reuters

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Yves Herman/Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                               8 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 23, 2018 Wednesday 1:26 AM GMT

Australia free trade deal talks to push for greater access to EU's agriculture
markets;
Agreement would create jobs at home and in Europe, Malcolm Turnbull says· Sign
up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon

BYLINE: Paul Karp

SECTION: BUSINESS; Version:2

LENGTH: 536 words


Australia will push for expanded access to Europe's agricultural markets in free
trade talks with the EU after its member states gave the green light for
negotiations to start within weeks.

The trade minister, Steve Ciobo, has said Australia would aim for a
"high-quality, comprehensive free trade deal with the European Union in as quick
a time as possible" but would not "sacrifice the quality of a trade deal for
speed".


     ·    Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon


At a press conference in Canberra on Wednesday Malcolm Turnbull announced that
the EU had agreed to a mandate to negotiate a free trade agreement with
Australia.

The prime minister said free trade was "key to my government's plan" for
economic growth and the EU deal would "create more jobs in Australia and it will
create more jobs in Europe".

"It is not a zero-sum game."

Asked about European resistance to reducing agricultural barriers, including the
French president Emanuel Macron's assurances that French farmers would not be
affected, Turnbull said Australia imported more agricultural products from
Europe than it exported.

That fact "tells you a lot about how relatively little access Australian farmers
have to Europe", he said. "There is a huge amount of scope for more access to
the European market."

Turnbull praised Macron, saying that he and Germany's chancellor, Angela Merkel,
had pushed to allow EU negotiations with Australia to get under way.

Ciobo said Australia wanted to conclude the EU deal "as quick as we practicably
can" but added: "I've always said I won't sacrifice the quality of a trade deal
for speed."

"A good-quality trade deal with Europe will include enhanced agricultural access
for Australian exporters."

Ciobo said Australia exported $3.6bn of agricultural products to the EU and
impored $4.9bn and that "had to change". But he said agriculture was only "one
aspect" of a trade deal.

In a statement Turnbull said the Coalition would also seek "better access for
Australian services exporters; [to] expand two-way investment flows; and deliver
a more seamless business environment".

"We will explore rules and initiatives to support the digital economy and
innovation, which are important for small and medium-sized enterprises."

The European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, has vowed to complete
the EU's talks with Australia and New Zealand by 31 October 2019, when his time
in office expires.

The UK will not be able to start its negotiations over future trade with New
Zealand and Australia until 30 March 2019.

Earlier, speaking to ABC's AM, Ciobo insisted the talks would happen "in
parallel" with free trade negotiations with the UK.

"That's progressing, these things are happening in parallel. It's not a case of
it being black or white, it's a case of doing both of these together."

Turnbull trumpeted his government's achievements on free trade, including a new
deal with Peru and reviving the Trans-Pacific Partnership with 11 nations,
despite the withdrawal of the US. He said Australia was also in "advanced
negotiations with Indonesia".

Given the combined GDP of US$1.7tn of the EU, a deal with the regional bloc
would potentially be Australia's largest free trade agreement.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                               9 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                        May 22, 2018 Tuesday 3:21 PM GMT

Boris Johnson joins US in criticising Russia to Germany gas pipeline;
Foreign secretary says Nord Stream 2 could leave Europe reliant on 'malign'
Russia

BYLINE: Patrick Wintour Diplomatic editor

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 828 words


The UK foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, has joined the US in condemning
"divisive" German plans to press ahead with the construction of the Nord Stream
2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany, arguing it could leave European energy
consumers heavily dependent on "a malign Russian state".

The giant pipeline, and the terms on which it is built, has become the litmus
test of a dispute on how Europe can reach a working relationship with Moscow and
yet defend its liberal values from a Russian threat.

In a letter released to pro-Polish British MPs, Johnson says it is right to
highlight the "divisiveness of this pipeline across Europe", adding that
"Euro-Atlantic unity remains our strongest tool in standing up to malign Russian
activity".

He also says energy security must be driven by regulations that reduce the
ability of any single supplier to exert monopoly control. He insists the EU is
right to call for amendments to EU directives to ensure there is a level playing
field between gas connectors, a change that would require Germany to allow
non-Russian gas to use the pipelines.

Although Johnson in his letter does not specifically call for the pipeline to be
halted, he says the UK stands firm in its support for Ukraine on the issue.
Ukraine has been leading the opposition to the pipeline, as Russia plans to
bypass the current pipeline routed through Ukraine that provides Kiev with badly
needed annual income worth 2% of its GDP.

The 745-mile (1,200km) $11.7bn (£8.7bn) Nord Stream 2 is due to be completed in
2019 and will run through the Baltic Sea to Germany. It will follow the track of
the existing Nord Stream 1, doubling the pipeline's annual capacity to 110bn
cubic metres. Germany says the pipeline is necessary to fill an energy gap left
by the phasing out of its nuclear plants, and the projected decline in supply
from Norway and the Netherlands, as their reserves wane.

In recent weeks Germany has come under intensifying American pressure to halt
the pipeline, forcing Angela Merkel on to the defensive over her claim that the
pipeline's construction is strictly a commercial decision with no political
implications. The issue is starting to dominate major bilateral discussions in
Europe, including a summit last Friday in Sochi between the German chancellor
and Vladimir Putin. Merkel has been urging the Russian president to guarantee
the Ukraine pipeline will still be used, alongside Nord Stream, but he has said
that will only happen if it is economically justified.

The US pressure stems in part from genuine concern at a Russian stranglehold on
EU energy needs, but Germany has viewed the US involvement as a self-interested
commercial intervention designed to increase its liquid gas sales to the
European market.

The UK, preoccupied by Brexit, has until now tried to keep a low profile on Nord
Stream even though its closest natural allies in Europe, the Baltic states,
Poland, Hungary and the Ukraine, all fiercely oppose the pipeline on current
terms.

Johnson will also be aware that backbench Tory opposition to the pipeline comes
from Eurosceptic MPs wary of German influence inside Europe. Commentators in
Russian newspapers such as Pravda this week confidently claimed that UK energy
needs would become the anvil on which British opposition to Russia collapses.
Reliant on the evaporating reserves of the Norwegians and Dutch for liquid gas,
the UK will be forced to turn to Russian gas, and "beg Russia for forgiveness",
Pravda claimed.

There also fears among Euro-sceptics that the Foreign Office has been holding
back from condemning Nord Stream because the UK government does not want to
alienate Germany at a sensitive moment in the Brexit talks. Daniel Kawczynski,
the chair of the all-party parliamentary group on Poland, said: "The letter is
not as forthright as it could be, and in some way obfuscates, but importantly it
accepts there are implications to the pipeline that extend well beyond what is
in Germany's economic self-interest."

The final German permits for the construction of the pipeline, opposed by the
European commission, were issued last month, ironically just days after Berlin
symbolically expelled four Russian diplomats in protest at Moscow's involvement
in the poisoning of the former spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter, Yulia.

But the new pipeline is not a done deal, with opposition growing across Europe,
including among MEPs. The US injected a fresh element into the discussion when
Sandra Oudkirk, its deputy assistant secretary of state for energy diplomacy,
said the US feared the pipeline would allow Moscow to place new listening and
monitoring technology in the Baltic Sea.

She said Congress had given the US president new powers to impose sanctions
against a variety of Russian pipeline projects.

Germany is looking for a deal that somehow keeps Kiev as a supplier, believing
this could normalise relations between Ukraine, Russia and Germany. The EU's
objections would be overridden.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              10 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                        May 22, 2018 Tuesday 9:12 AM GMT

Boris Johnson rejects Bank of England's claim Brexit has already damaged UK
economy - Politics live;
Rolling coverage of the day's political developments as they happenBlair's Today
interview on Brexit - SummaryLunchtime summaryAfternoon summary

BYLINE: Andrew Sparrow

SECTION: POLITICS; Version:16

LENGTH: 7676 words


block-time published-time 5.43pm BST


Afternoon summary

     ·    Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, has dismissed an analysis from
          the Bank of England saying British households are more than £900 worse
          off following the vote to leave the European Union. At a press
          conference in Argentina Johnson said Philip Hammond, the chancellor,
          had refuted the Treasury's figures. (See 4.58pm.) But although Hammond
          told MPs today that it was too early to know what the impact of
          leaving the EU would be, the chancellor did not challenge the Bank's
          assertion that the vote to leave has already had a negative impact.
          (See 5.17pm.)


     ·    The EU has leapt ahead of the UK in the pursuit of free trade deals
          with Australia and New Zealand after member states gave the green
          light for talks to start within weeks.


     ·    The government has warned a group of MPs they are breaching
          parliamentary privilege by asking a court to rule on whether Brexit
          can be halted unilaterally by the UK.


     ·    Britain's biggest civil servants' union is to ballot 154,000 civil
          servants over possible strike action against the government's
          controversial pay cap. As Rajeev Syal reports, the annual conference
          of the Public and Commercial Services union (PCS) in Brighton agreed
          that members should be balloted for industrial action. Possible strike
          action could target the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency in
          Cardiff, workers implementing universal credit and border controls and
          tax officials.


     ·    Ben Wallace, the security minister, has told MPs that the UK is "fast
          becoming the biggest consumer of cocaine in Europe". Speaking in a
          Commons debate on serious violence, he said:



In the old days, if you wanted to import huge amounts of cocaine to this
country, somebody had to go to Colombia, somebody had to meet people.

In the space of about eight years, you don't have to do that. You can sit at
home, you can deal your drugs, you can order your drugs, you can launder almost
instantaneously, through Bitcoin and everything else, your money.

In the past there were plenty of middle men between local gangs and the big,
serious, organised criminals running out of Colombia or Balkans gangs.

That has reduced, and now what you find is through absolute, often safe and
secure, encryption, the ability for young people to order their drugs, gangs to
get delivered literally to their door large packets of drugs from Albanian drug
gangs, from Serbian drug gangs, or indeed from local drugs. It's not entirely
the copyright of the western Balkans, of United Kingdom citizens.

That has put a real power into a system where at the same time the United
Kingdom is fast becoming the biggest consumer of cocaine in Europe, so there is
a high demand by the consumer.

That's all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.

Boris Johnson leaving his press conference in Buenos Aires. Photograph: Marcos
Brindicci/Reuters

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.44pm BST

block-time published-time 5.23pm BST

Immigration minister criticised after admitting not reading Good Friday
agreement

The Home Office minister with responsibility for the Irish border admitted she
had not read the Good Friday Agreement because she was probably giving birth
when it was signed 20 years ago.

Caroline Nokes come under sustained attack from MPs over her lack of knowledge
about the sensitive issues of nationality, policies of Border Force recruitment
and smuggling in Northern Ireland during a select committee appearance on
Tuesday afternoon.

After trying to bluff her way through the Northern Ireland Affairs committee
interrogation, she admitted she had not read a string of key reports relating to
current issues in the region.

The immigration minister opened her remarks by saying it was "crucially
important for the British government to uphold the Belfast Agreement" but when
asked by Sylvia Hermon, Independent MP for North Down, whether she had ever read
the Belfast Agreement she replied: "Not in its entirety no".

Hermon expressed astonishment, asking her if she ever read it in the 20 years
since it was signed.

"No, but 20 years ago I was probably giving birth and I've been immigration
minister for five months," Nokes replied.

She also found herself on the ropes when quizzed about Irish nationals living in
Northern Ireland who were being treated like "third country nationals" and did
not have the "parity of esteem" espoused in the Good Friday Agreement.

She was told that those who may have "by accident of birth" being born on the
other side of the border but who had lived all their lives in Northern Ireland
were being forced go through a naturalisation process and pay £1,330 for
citizenship applications in order to get a British passport, something they were
entitled to under the Good Friday Agreement.

Those who identified as British nationals could, on the other hand, get an Irish
passport easily with no "third country national" fees or policy by the Irish
government.

Nokes eventually admitted that feelings on the committee were "strong" and she
would look at what several MPs told her was a breach of the Good Friday
Agreement.

Caroline Nokes. Photograph: Parliament TV

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.41am BST

block-time published-time 5.17pm BST

What Hammond actually said about the Bank of England's Brexit analysis -
contrary to what Johnson claimed

At his press conference in Argentina Boris Johnson claimed that the chancellor,
Philip Hammond, had rejected the Bank of England's assertion that the Brexit
vote has damaged the economy. (See 4.58pm.)

Not for the first time, Johnson wasn't been strictly accurate. Hammond was asked
about the Bank of England analysis twice at Treasury questions today, by the Lib
Dem MP  Tom Brake and by the Labour MP Rushanara Ali. He said the Treasury would
publish its own analysis in due course and that it was too early to know what
the impact of leaving the EU would be. But he was studiously non-committal, and
he did not not challenge the Bank's claim that the vote to leave the EU has
already had a negative impact.

Hammond told Brake:

On the question of future trajectory of household incomes, that will depend in
part on the quality of the deal that we negotiate as we exit the European Union
- and we are focused on getting the very best deal for British jobs, British
prosperity and for British businesses.

And he told Ali:

We haven't yet concluded our negotiations with the European Union and therefore
it's impossible to make any assessment of the impact of our departure from the
European Union until we know what the future relationship with the European
Union will be.

block-time published-time 4.58pm BST

Boris Johnson says UK will 'prosper' under Brexit

The foreign secretary,  Boris Johnson, on the latest stop on his whistle-stop
tour of South America, has rejected Mark Carney's claim that Brexit is costing
households £900 a year.

Speaking at a joint press conference with the Argentine foreign minister Jorge
Faurie, Johnson said:

I believe that the chancellor of the exchequer has given a definitive answer on
this matter, which is that it is not the case that Brexit has damaged the
interests of this country.

On the contrary, as you know, and as I've said repeatedly, when it comes to it I
think that both the UK and Argentina will prosper, as a result of our ability to
do unhindered and unfettered trade deals, as a result of our joint prospectus.
That's what we're both engaged on - we both want to be more outward-looking, and
Brexit gives us that opportunity.

Johnson also highlighted the prospects for a trade deal with Mercosur, the
trading bloc of which Argentina is a part - and which has been trying to strike
a deal with the EU for two decades.

"We are already, the British people, thanks to their prodigious appetite are
already the second biggest consumers of Argentine wine. And that is before we
have done the free trade deal that we hope to achieve," he said - echoing
remarks in the past about Italian prosecco.

Faurie said Argentina wanted to be "present in the British market" after Brexit,
but would wait and see the details of Britain's future relationship with other
countries.

block-time published-time 4.53pm BST

The splash headline on today's first edition of the Evening Standard may have
given readers the impression that t he Labour Ian McKenzie story is a bit more
lurid than is actually the case.

enltrToday's @EveningStandard : Labour's Lewisham chief suspended over
'misogynistic' tweets about Emily Thornberry & Victoria Beckham speaks to us
about that wedding & Harry Kane named captain of England + all the latest from
the Chelsea Flower Show pic.twitter.com/ASrCtUhREo

- George Osborne (@George_Osborne) May 22, 2018

block-time published-time 4.42pm BST

McDonnell says 'Tory negotiations' to blame for Bank of England claims about
Brexit damaging economy

And  John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, has also been commenting on the Bank
of England's comments about Brexit costing households about £900 a year.
McDonnell said this was because the Tories were mishandling Brexit. Speaking at
the PCS annual conference in Brighton he said:

It is a worrying estimate. I know that Mark Carney is doing his best, and to be
as exact as he possibly can. But this does demonstrate that this is an estimate
based upon Tory negotiations. If we were doing these negotiations now we would
be doing everything we could to protect the economy and protect jobs. I think
his calculations are an estimate taking into account where we are in
negotiations.

Asked about Labour's own splits over whether or not the UK should stay in the
single maket, McDonnell said:

I don't think there is a split [in Labour]. I think there is a proper debate and
discussion going on and so we are keeping all our options open. We are quite
clear where are on transition and a customs union. We want the benefits of a
single market and thats what we are moving towards.I don't think it is a split.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.44pm BST

block-time published-time 4.32pm BST

Boris Johnson rejects Bank of England governor's claim Brexit has already
damaged UK economy

Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, has used his press conference in Argentina
to reject the Bank of England governor's assertion that Brexit has already
damaged the economy. These are from my colleague Heather Stewart and from the
Sun's  Matt Dathan.

enltrI asked BJ about Mark Carney's claim Brexit has cost £900 per household. He
says chancellor's verdict is definitive one, and shows Brexit hasn't damaged the
economy. Hmmm.

- Heather Stewart (@GuardianHeather) May 22, 2018

enltrBoris Johnson hits back at Carney - saying it's "absolutely not the case
that Brexit has damaged the interests of this country". Speaking alongside
Argentine Foreign Minister Jorge Faurie pic.twitter.com/PpXZN3mcos

- Matt Dathan (@matt_dathan) May 22, 2018     Boris Johnson with his Argentinian
counterpart, Jorge Faurie, in Buenos Aires, Argentina. Photograph: Stefan
Rousseau/PA

block-time published-time 4.17pm BST

Gavin Williamson, the defence secretary, has been giving evidence to the Common
defence committee. Here are some of the lines that have come out. The tweets are
from the BBC's Jonathan Beale and the Times' Deborah Haynes  (both defence
specialists).


     ·    Williamson said that by the end of this year eight Nato countries
          would be spending at least 2% of their GDP on defence (the Nato
          target). According to these figures from DefenseNews, in 2017 four
          countries were spending more than 2% (the US, the UK, Greece and
          Estonia) and another two were at the 2% level (Poland and Romania).


enltrGW says everything US done under #Trump underlines its commitment to #NATO
but adds European members need to do more. He says Trump v keen others do more

- Jonathan Beale (@bealejonathan) May 22, 2018

enltrGW says he believes 8 #NATO members will be spending 2% of GDP on defence
by end of year before adding it's a floor not a ceiling

- Jonathan Beale (@bealejonathan) May 22, 2018

enltrHas election of @realDonaldTrump as US president "materially upset or
weakened smooth working of @NATO ?" asks @CommonsDefence chair. No, says GW
Hmmmmm - really?! I think others might beg to differ. No smooth running for Nato
until all allies pay at least 2% of GDP on defence

- Deborah Haynes (@haynesdeborah) May 22, 2018

     ·    Williamson refused to confirm that he has written to the prime
          minister proposing to send more troops to Afghanistan for training
          purposes.


enltrGW asked about increase of UK troops to #Afghanistan. GW says deployment is
kept under review. But says he can't comment further

- Jonathan Beale (@bealejonathan) May 22, 2018

enltrGW says UK forces key in providing security in #Kabul. Mark Francois asks
if going back to combat? GW says will inform MPs of any change. (But truth is no
political appetite for return to combat )

- Jonathan Beale (@bealejonathan) May 22, 2018

enltrGW still trying to fend off questions about UK troop increase in
#Afghanistan. Won't even confirm he's written to PM

- Jonathan Beale (@bealejonathan) May 22, 2018

enltrUK should be doing more in @NATO, GW says - possibly setting scene for
announcement of increase in UK troops to Afghanistan

- Deborah Haynes (@haynesdeborah) May 22, 2018

enltr. @DefenceHQ will give oral statement to @HouseofCommons if UK decides to
increase troop numbers to Afghanistan, GW says. He declines to confirm whether
he has requested an uplift of around 400 troops but says deployment size is kept
under constant review

- Deborah Haynes (@haynesdeborah) May 22, 2018

     ·    Williamson spoke about the need to make peace with the Taliban.


enltrUK supports long term solution to challenges in Afghanistan involving peace
process with Taliban even though such a prospect will be a "painful thing" for
many people following years of war, GW signals

- Deborah Haynes (@haynesdeborah) May 22, 2018

     ·    He floated the prospect of retaining older warships instead of
          disposing of them.


enltrInteresting - GW says an idea put to him by Mark Francois to keep older
warships in reserve rather than flogging them to other countries is "really very
important" and is something that @DefenceHQ will look into. He says UK has
sometimes "disposed of assets" too soon in past

- Deborah Haynes (@haynesdeborah) May 22, 2018     Gavin Williamson Photograph:
P/Parliament TV

block-time published-time 3.50pm BST

Boris Johnson,  the foreign secretary, is holding a press conference in Buenos
Aires, my colleague Heather Stewart (who is with the press pack accompanying
him) reports.

enltrI'm here in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Buenos Aires, where we're
awaiting Boris Johnson and his Argentine counterpart Jorge Faurie, who are
expected to signal a new era of warmer bilateral relations.
pic.twitter.com/uwfCi2qgTi

- Heather Stewart (@GuardianHeather) May 22, 2018

block-time published-time 3.44pm BST

Theresa May greeting members of the clergy as she arrives at The Manchester
Arena National Service of Commemoration at Manchester Cathedral earlier today.
Photograph: WPA Pool/Getty Images      Scotland's first minister Nicola Sturgeon
(grey jacket) with Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, (on her right) and Sir
Vince Cable, the Lib Dem leader, (on her left) and others after the Manchester
Arena bombing memorial service. Photograph: Darren Staples/Reuters

block-time published-time 3.36pm BST

TUC boss says staying in single market and customs union 'best choice' for
Brexit

Frances O'Grady  has revealed she has only met Theresa May once - notably less
often then she has seen Angela Merkel - something the TUC general secretary said
was indicative of the low priority placed on unions and workers' rights by the
government.

Speaking to a press gallery lunch in parliament, O'Grady also warned that
working people would be unwilling to bear the economic cost of a hard Brexit,
and said she felt that this message was finally being heard in Downing Street.

As is traditional at such lunches, O'Grady also included a few jokes, such as
saying that rather than describing the UK economy as "menopausal", the Bank of
England could instead say it was suffering from "erectile dysfunction".

Asked after her speech how often she saw May, O'Grady said she had had a single
meeting with the PM almost two years ago, shortly after she entered No 10:

I've her met once. I have had in the past sometimes reflected on the fact that
I've met Angela Merkel, the president of Ireland and various other many more
times than our own prime minister. This isn't, for me, a left-right issue. There
are countries where it's recognised that it's important not just to listen to
business but to listen to working people, too.

On Brexit, O'Grady said people "just can't afford a hard Brexit", warning also
about the potential impact on the Irish border.

Ordinary working people in this country felt that they paid a very, very high
price for the financial crash, and I don't think we can see them paying the bill
for Brexit...

My own instinct is that for the first time the penny is beginning to drop in No
10, that this isn't just people making it up, or using it as an agenda. This is
real - this is about people's lives and their jobs and it's about that delicate
peace that has held us in good stead for 30 years. Nobody wants to be alarmist,
but neither should anybody gamble with the Good Friday agreement.

The TUC, as is well known, has a considerably softer Brexit position than the
Labour leadership, supporting continued membership of both the single market and
customs union. O'Grady said Labour's eventual embrace of some form of customs
union membership was "a significant step forwards", and that she hoped for more.

When it comes to looking at how do we avoid that hard border, the TUC has looked
at all the options very carefully, and the best choice we can see is belonging
to the customs union and the single market. We always say: if someone's got a
better idea, then let's hear it. But it had better be a realistic, feasible,
practical idea.

Frances O'Grady, the TUC general secretary. Photograph: Gareth Fuller/PA

block-time published-time 3.10pm BST

Caroline Nokes, the immigration minister, is giving evidence to the Commons
Northern Ireland committee. As my colleague Lisa O'Carroll reports, it's not
going well. Nokes has been criticised for not having read the whole of the Good
Friday agremeent.

enltrImmigration minister Caroline Nokes being quizzed about Irish citizens in
Northern Ireland getting Irish passport easily from Dublin but those who have
lived their all their lives but born in republic must pay £1,330 for British
passport 1/

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

enltrCaroline Nokes told at Northern Ireland affairs committee that persons
holding Irish citizenship in Northern Ireland born in republic "are treated as
second class citizens" /2 Told this contravenes Good Friday Agreement

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

enltrAndrew Murrison of Northern Ireland Affairs committee tells Caroline Nokes
that British citizens in Northern Ireland who find getting an Irish passport
expedient can get one easily. Nokes insists she can't change rules for Irish
citizens looking for British passports

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

enltrCaroline Nokes flounders when asked by Kate Hoey why British and Irish
citizens in NI are treated differently when it comes to seeking both passports.
She says she thinks the wording in GFA meant citizens "on that date" in NI 20
years ago.

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

enltrKate Hoey tells Caroline Nokes that treatment of irish citizens and british
citizens in Northern Ireland in relation to acquisition of both passports is
"contrary to the Good Friday Agreement". Nokes denies this.

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

enltrKate Hoey: "Have you ever read any Irish history. I'm amazed at that
response" when Nokes tells her that Irish are third country nationals in
Northern Ireland

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

enltrNokes asked if she had ever read any Irish history: "Not for a long time"

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

enltrSylvia Hermon: Have you read the Belfast Agreement? Caroline Nokes: Not in
its entirety no" Hermon: Have you ever read the Belfast Agreement Nokes: No

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

enltrHermon puts it to Nokes that as the immigration minister who has to uphold
the Belfast Agreement that it might have been a priority to read the Belfast
Agreement. Here's a copy of it... https://t.co/4CGhocSWRN

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

enltrCaroline Nokes says she was "probably giving birth" when the Belfast
Agreement was struck. And she hasn't read it since, even when appointed
immigration minister with responsibility for borders in N Ireland

- lisa o'carroll (@lisaocarroll) May 22, 2018

block-time published-time 2.47pm BST

TUC boss Frances O'Grady says she's had more meetings with Merkel than May

Frances O'Grady, the TUC general secretary, has been speaking at a press gallery
lunch at Westminster. As the BBC's Carolyn Quinn reports, O'Grady told her
journalist audience that she had had more meetings with Angela Merkel than with
Theresa May.

enltrTUC head Frances O'Grady tells Westminster journalists she has only ever
had one face to face meeting with Theresa May-just after she became PM. Says
she's met Merkel many more times.Hammond &DD on "semi-regular basis". Meets
Jeremy Corbyn on regular basis.

- carolyn quinn (@carolynquinncq) May 22, 2018

O'Grady also had a good response to t he Bank of England deputy governor who
said the economy was menopausal. This is from Sky's Jon Craig.

enltrGreat gag from TUC chief Frances O'Grady at Press Gallery lunch re BoE boss
calling economy "menopausal": "Perhaps next time BoE will say economy is in
erectile dysfunction."

- Jon Craig (@joncraig) May 22, 2018

block-time published-time 2.39pm BST

Labour's national executive committee has been meeting today. As LabourList's
Sienna Rodgers reports, Unison's Wendy Nichols was elected vice chair, beating
the candidate backed by Jeremy Corbyn by 18 votes to 17. Here is the BBC's Iain
Watson on the result.

enltrI am told GMB (& Scottish Labour leader Richard Leonard who is a
member)backed Wendy Nichols as #labour#NEC vice chair - against leadership's
preferred candidate Andi Fox. Some see it as an attempt by the GMB to clip
Unite's wings -who backed Fox and have provided the Gen Sec

- iain watson (@iainjwatson) May 22, 2018

block-time published-time 2.09pm BST

The Brexit department has now published the analysis mentioned earlier about how
the House of Commons Evel (English votes for English laws) rules apply to the
amendments to the EU withdrawal bill passed in the Lords. As expected (see
10.56am), it confirms there are no Evel implications. This is from the BBC's
Daniel Kraemer.

enltrFull statement has been published. Basically says "Nothing. Has. Changed."
...but comes with a nice table of Lords amendments to put on your walls (cc:
@labourwhips ) pic.twitter.com/kvaE8GZrNa

- Daniel Kraemer (@dcakraemer) May 22, 2018

block-time published-time 1.11pm BST

Lunchtime summary

     ·    John Bercow, the Commons speaker, has been reported to the
          parliamentary commissioner for standards by a Conservative MP over
          reports he called Andrea Leadsom, the leader of the Commons, a "stupid
          woman". (See 12.24pm.)


     ·    Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, has said that real
          household incomes are £900 lower than forecast following the vote to
          leave the EU.


     ·    Tony Blair has refused to personally apologise to the Libyan dissident
          Abdel Hakim Belhaj, who was tortured in a jail in Libya following a
          rendition operation mounted with the help of MI6, saying he knew
          nothing about the case until after he left office. As Peter Walker and
          Ian Cobain report, Blair, speaking about the case for the first time
          since Theresa May's government apologised to Belhaj and his wife,
          Fatima Boudchar, said he was "content to go along with" that apology,
          but did not express any personal remorse.


     ·    Blair has accused both main parties of misleading voters about the
          impact of Brexit. In an article posted on the website of his
          thinktank, he said:


What is also now clear is that the leadership of both main political parties are
engaged in the same sleight of hand, namely pretending that we can have
frictionless trade while leaving the single market.

As our report shows, this is simply wrong. The single market is a unique trading
area where not only is trade tariff free, but it is also free of non-tariff
barriers, through regulatory alignment. It therefore allows complete freedom of
trade for goods and a substantial amount of free trade in services where Europe
has adopted common sets of rules.

Membership of the customs union alone does not solve the problem of friction,
because if Britain wants freedom to diverge on product regulation then there
will still need to be checks. And, of course, if Britain is part of a customs
union then it cannot make its own trade deals.

Claiming in the article that the Labour party would "pay a heavy price for the
leadership's closet Euroscepticism". Blair also said Labour should propose
staying in the single market and the customs union and giving people a say on
the final deal in a referendum.


     ·    Jeremy Wright, the attorney general, has applied to the high court to
          free up at least £400m from a fund that has effectively been frozen,
          in order to reduce the UK's massive national debt.


     ·    A new clean air strategy published by the UK government has been
          criticised as "hugely disappointing" by the Labour party.


     ·    Ian McKenzie, the chair of Labour's Lewisham East constituency party,
          has been suspended ahead of next month's byelection over allegedly
          misogynistic tweets. In a statement, published in full here on
          HuffPost, McKenzie apologised for causing offence but said that his
          tweets had been taken out of context and that they were not
          misogynist.


block-time published-time 12.43pm BST

Treasury questions was relatively uneventful. Politico Europe's  Charlie Cooper
has tweeted a couple of lines from it.

enltrHammond at Treasury questions just now on customs union: "I have
consistently sought arrangements that will protect our existing trade with the
EU," wants "minimum possible friction at border"... "We don't believe it
necessary to be in a customs union to achieve that."

- Charlie Cooper (@CharlieCooper8) May 22, 2018

enltrHammond asked about Carney's comments on Brexit and household incomes.
Chancellor repeats pledge that MPs will have government economic analysis when
they vote on Brexit deal, and that future trajectory of household incomes "will
depend in part" on how good that deal is

- Charlie Cooper (@CharlieCooper8) May 22, 2018

block-time published-time 12.24pm BST

Tory MP reports Bercow to Commons standards commissioner over 'stupid woman'
Leadsom jibe

According to the Telegraph (paywall), the Conservative MP James Duddridge has
submitted a formal complaint to Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner
for standards about the reports that  John Bercow, the Commons speaker, called
Andrea Leadsom, the leader of the Commons, a "stupid woman".

In his letter to Stone, seen by the Telegraph, Duddridge said:

I am writing in order to make a formal complaint concerning the behaviour of the
speaker, the Rt Hon John Bercow MP, on Wednesday 16th May 2018, and his comments
concerning the Leader of the House, the Rt Hon Andrea Leadsom MP.

He is alleged to have called her a "fucking stupid woman" and a "liar". He has
not denied these allegations.

I would ask that primary video and audio footage is examined. I would also ask
that this footage is secured immediately as it may be routinely destroyed.

Bercow made a statement about this in the chamber yesterday. He did not deny the
allegation, and he did not apologise. He did claim that he was making a comment
about the government's conduct, not about Leadsom's intelligence. But, overall,
he suggested he deserved credit for his outburst because he was standing up for
MPs against an abuse of procedure by the executive.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.32pm BST

block-time published-time 12.06pm BST

John Healey, a former shadow health secretary, has welcomed the BBC report
saying the government is considering repealing elements of 2012 Health and
Social Care Act.

enltrWhen I led Labour's fight against the Health and Social Care Bill in 2011,
I said it would mean fragmentation and privatisation, and was the wrong
prescription for the NHS. Seven years later, it seems Tory Ministers now agree
https://t.co/p7Vqlf5I4e

- John Healey MP (@JohnHealey_MP) May 22, 2018

block-time published-time 12.01pm BST

Save the Children failed to inform Unicef that its former chief executive had
been investigated over alleged sexual misconduct before moving to the UN agency,
the charity's former chairman has told MPs. As the Press Association reports,
Sir Alan Parker  said Unicef was not told about the investigation into Justin
Forsyth, conducted by an independent law firm, because it was not a "formal
disciplinary process".

Parker, who stepped down from Save the Children earlier this year after the aid
sector sex abuse scandal broke, also said he and other directors vetoed a
£20,000 bonus awarded to Forsyth while the investigation was under way. Forsyth
quit his role as deputy executive director of Unicef in April after allegations
of inappropriate behaviour towards female members of staff emerged during his
time at Save the Children, where he was chief executive between 2010 and 2016.

Parker told MPs in the international development committee that the charity had
spoken with a third-party headhunter about Forsyth but that it was its policy
"not to mention things if they have not been the subject of formal disciplinary
process".

Asked whether the investigation should have been flagged up, he said:

When I look back, there are a number of things we would have done differently. I
think we would have done it in a way that would have settled it at each time
more appropriately and I think very clearly there were quite specific HR
failings in this, which I have to take on board as I was chairman at the time.

block-time published-time 11.37am BST

And here is some response to the Bank of England's claim that households are
£900 worse off because of Brexit. (See 11.32am.)

From Sir  Vince Cable, the Lib Dem leader

At the time of the Brexit vote the fact that the economy didn't immediately
collapse was argued as proof that leaving the EU was painless. We now know that
it wan't painless, to the extent that households are already £900 a year worse
off, and Brexit has not even happened as yet.

Inflation caused by a weak pound and stuttering economic growth are cutting into
people's everyday lives. But we can stop this, because Brexit is not inevitable
- people must be allowed a say on the final deal.

From the Labour MP Wes Streeting, a supporter of the People's Vote campaign
(which released Streeting's statement)

Brexit is already costing every person in this country hundreds of pounds in
lower income, and we haven't even left yet.

The governor of the Bank of England is quite clear that the Brexit vote has left
us all poorer and worse-off, and the government's botched Brexit negotiations
threaten to make the situation even worse for generations to come.

Evidence like this demonstrates exactly why we need a People's Vote on the final
Brexit deal.

block-time published-time 11.32am BST

Bank of England says households are £900 worse off because of Brexit

At the Commons Treasury committee Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England,
and his deputy, Dave Ramsden, told MPs that real household incomes are £900
lower today than forecast in May 2016 because of Brexit.

My colleague Graeme Wearden has more on his business live blog.

Related:  Pound jumps on interest rate rise forecasts, as public finances
improve - business live

block-time published-time 10.56am BST

False alarm. According to a DExEU source, the David Davis written statement on
standing order 83o (see 10.48am) is a routine formality and it is going to say
that there are no Evel implications for the EU withdrawal bill. The SNP will be
voting on the Lords amendments after all.

block-time published-time 10.48am BST

As Labour Whips point out, David Davis, the Brexit secretary, is due to make a
potentially interesting written statement later today.

enltrDavid Davis making a WMS on the Withdrawal Bill with reference to the
application of SO 83O - potentially significant announcement on Govt's strategy
for the Bill H/t @danbloom1pic.twitter.com/CrvX6eVFuB

- Labour Whips (@labourwhips) May 22, 2018

enltrFull link to Standing Orders is here https://t.co/VktqeKHzRv

- Labour Whips (@labourwhips) May 22, 2018

Standing order 83o relates to the Evel (English votes for English laws)
provisions brought in after 2015.

It looks like this could be a move to stop the SNP voting on some of the Lords
amendments to the EU withdrawal bill, although, as SO 83o says, the final
decision would be up to the speaker.

UPDATE:  False alarm. According to a DExEU source, the David Davis written
statement on standing order 83o (see 10.48am) is a routine formality and it is
going to say that there are no Evel implications for the EU withdrawal bill. The
SNP will be voting on the Lords amendments after all.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.57am BST

block-time published-time 10.31am BST

Gove says proposed Brexit backstop should only apply for 'short period of time'

Michael Gove, the Brexiter environment secretary, told the Today programme this
morning that any Brexit "backstop" that keeps the UK in the EU's common external
tariff should only apply for a "short time".

The government has agreed to have a "backstop" to avoid the imposition of a hard
border in Ireland after Brexit in case its preferred means of avoiding a hard
border - a good trade deal, or new customs technology - don't work.

Last week it emerged that ministers have agreed that the backstop would involve
the UK remaining bound by the EU's common external tariff for a period after
December 2020, when the transition ends. Brexiters are unhappy about this,
because it would be akin to keeping the UK in the customs union after the
transition, although No 10 argues that technically the UK would have left. But
Gove and other cabinet Brexiters agreed to the plan as a last resort option.

In his Today interview Gove said that what was envisaged was just "a temporary
infill". Asked what temporary meant, he said:

It means what it says on the tin. That temporary means not permanent. It means
for a short period of time. I'm not going to pre-empt the eventual position that
we take after we have negotiated with the European Union and with Ireland...

The very nature of a backstop, everyone agrees, is that it should be a temporary
infill to bridge the position. In the same way as when you move house, a
bridging loan is meant to be temporary, but, whether that's weeks or months, we
don't know precisely.

Iain Duncan Smith, the former work and pensions secretary and another Tory
Brexiter, said last week the proposed backstop should not apply for more than
two months. Theresa May said yesterday it would apply only "in a very limited
set of circumstances for a limited time".

Michael Gove arriving this morning at No 10 for cabinet. Photograph: Mark
Thomas/REX/Shutterstock

block-time published-time 10.15am BST

Peers abandon bid to legislate for new Leveson-style press inquiry

Peers yesterday abandoned their attempt to force a new public inquiry into the
media industry, following weeks of parliamentary ping-ping between the two
houses of parliament.

Opposition politicians forced the government to make a number of concessions,
while the Conservatives only won several close votes thanks to the support of
Northern Ireland's Democratic Unionist party.

However, press regulation supporters are now pinning their hopes on one final
tactic: a judicial review of culture secretary Matt Hancock's decision to cancel
the second part of the original Leveson inquiry.

Press regulation campaigners argue his decision to cancel an already-announced
public inquiry was irrational, unfair, and that the open consultation on
dropping the second part of Leveson was undermined by the Conservatives'
election manifesto commitment to do exactly that.

block-time published-time 10.09am BST

Blair says Labour could back second referendum on Brexit without alienating
leave supporters

I covered what Tony Blair said in his Today interview about the Abdel Hakim
Belhaj case earlier. (See 9.12am.) This is what he said about Brexit.


     ·    Blair criticised Labour's Brexit policy, saying it would not please
          leavers or remainers. Asked if the party would really pay "a heavy
          price" for this in a future election, as Blair claims in his article
          on his thinktank's website today, he said it could. He explained:


At the moment we're in a halfway house. We are in favour, apparently, of staying
in a customs union, which will disappoint the most ardent leavers, but we're not
actually in favour of staying in Europe's economic areas, which is necessary if
you want frictionless trade. And so many people who voted remain will then feel
less than enthusiastic about Labour...

My sense is that we are in the position now of neither pleasing the remainers
nor the leavers.


     ·    He said Labour should propose staying in the single market and the
          customs union and giving people a say on the final deal in a
          referendum. At that point it would be possible to argue that there was
          no point leaving, he suggested.


Essentially both parties have got the same problem, which is the central dilemma
at the heart of the negotiation is this. You stay close to Europe to minimise
economic damage, in which case you abide by Europe's rules, in which case people
say what's the point. Or you break free from Europe altogether, a clean break,
in which case the economic damage is considerable and people say what's the
price. There is no resolution to that dilemma. At some point the government will
have to come forward with a proposition. And I think the sensible thing for the
Labour party to do is to say, look, if we say we want a jobs first Brexit, that
means we stay close to Europe's economic area. And if people then say what's the
point of leaving, you say the final decision should be taken by the British
people if they want to proceed on that basis.


     ·    He accepted that Labour's more equivocal Brexit stance probably helped
          it during the general election, but he claimed that that approach
          would not work now. When it was put to him that Labour seemed to do
          well during the general election by avoiding the anti-Brexit stance
          Blair advocated, he replied:


Whereas I think that ambiguity probably did serve Labour well at the last
election - even though I didn't agree with it, it may have in the short term
served us well - I don't think it works any more today.

Asked what had changed, he said things had "moved on" since last year. He also
said:

What is different is the quality of our understanding of what the central choice
at the heart of this negotiation is.


     ·    He rejected the claim that Labour would alienate leave supporters if
          it backed a second referendum. He explained:


If the Labour party were to say to the country, 'Look, we've looked at this,
we've had this negotiation, what everyone now understands is that it's much more
complicated than we ever thought, there is this dilemma at the heart of of it,
we think the only way to minimise economic damage, as business and industry and
many others are saying, is to keep close to Europe, we agree then it poses a
great dilemma'... But the way of resolving that is the Labour party then to say,
'That's why, therefore, parliament should make its decision but finally the
decision should be taken by the people, who originally voted for Brexit and
mandated this negotiation'.

I think that would be a winning position for two reasons. First of all, you
would actually mobilise that remain vote. But, secondly, you would be saying to
the leave people, 'Look, ultimately you can take the decision'...

You could build a coalition between those people who voted remain and those
people who voted leave but would understand that they are ultimately going to
get the choice as to what happens.


     ·    He claimed Labour should now be doing better in the polls.


It's a pretty extraordinary situation. You've got a government that's in a state
of considerable disarray, huge problems with the health service, problems on law
and order, problems across the spectrum, and we're not even ahead of the
Conservatives in the opinion polls.


     ·    He mocked Boris Johnson's claim that trade deals with countries like
          those in South America would compensate for the economic damage caused
          by the UK leaving the single market. He said:


Look, you've got Boris Johnson going round Argentina, Peru and Chile saying,
'Look, we're going to get out of Europe and do these free trade deals with these
types of country.' The entirety of our exports to Argentina, Peru and Chile put
together is less than 6% of those to Ireland. When we talk about the
Commonwealth, we export more to the Netherlands than we do to Australia, New
Zealand, India and Canada put together.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.38pm BST

block-time published-time 9.22am BST

Tony Blair was on the Today programme talking about a report that his thinktank,
the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change, has published today about Brexit and
customs.

Here is the report. And here is a commentary on it by Blair himself.

block-time published-time 9.12am BST

Tony Blair says he did not know about Belhaj Libyan rendition case until after
he left office

Tony Blair  was on the Today programme this morning. He was mostly talking about
Brexit - more of that later - but towards the end Mishal Husain pointed out that
it was his first interview since the government apologised to the Libyan
dissident to Abdel Hakim Belhaj and his wife, Fatima Boudchar, for the role the
UK played in their rendition in 2004. Belhaj was tortured and Boudchar, who was
pregnant when kidnapped and mistreated, was paid £500,000 by the UK government
in compensation. Husain asked Blair would he would like to say about the case.
The exchange did not last long, but it was edgy and Blair's answers were
surprising - not least because they beg more questions than they answer.

Here are the main points.


     ·    Blair said he did not know about the abduction case until after he
          left office. "I did not actually know myself about this case until
          after I left office," he said in his first reply. When pressed on
          this, he said:


No. This case wasn't brought to my attention. There are a lot of things in this
case, some of which have been out in the media, some of which have not. There's
been a settlement of the case. I'm content to go along with the government's
apology in relation to it. It's not something I dealt with myself when I was in
government. I think that's all I can say.


     ·    He implied that key facts about the Belhaj case were not in the public
          domain. (See the quote above.)


     ·    He said he was "content" to go along with the government's apology.
          This is what he said when first asked what he would like to say about
          the case.


This has been subject to a long legal process. I have gone along with what the
government has done, which was issue the apology. I did not actually know myself
about this case until after I left office. So I'm content to go along with that
apology. And that's all that's frankly sensible for me to say.


     ·    He said he was "sorry" about what happened to Belhaj. When Husain put
          it to him that saying he was "content" to go along with the
          government's apology was a strange choice of words, and asked if he
          was able to say sorry himself, Blair replied:


Of course I'm sorry for any mistreatment that's been given to people. How on
earth would you ever justify that.


     ·    He insisted that he had always been opposed to torture, in public and
          in private. He said:


And, by the way, let me make one thing clear, because sometimes people say I was
ambivalent on the use of torture. I have always been wholly and 100%, in all
circumstances, opposed to the use of torture and I made that clear publicly,
privately, in any conversation I've ever had within government.

By contrast Jack Straw, who was foreign secretary at the time, admitted he did
know about the case, or at least about some aspects of it. Here is the statement
he issued on the day of the government's apology.

Here is the agenda for the day.

8am: Theresa May chairs a political cabinet, followed by a normal cabinet
meeting at 9.30am.

10am: Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, gives evidence to the
Commons Treasury committee. My colleague Graeme Wearden is covering this on his
business live blog.

10am:  Nick Gibb, the school standards minister, gives evidence to the Commons
education committee.

11.30am: Philip Hammond, the chancellor, takes questions in the Commons.

2.30pm:  Gavin Williamson, the defence secretary, gives evidence to the Commons
defence committee.

2.30pm:  Hilary Benn, the chair of the Brexit committee, gives a speech to a UK
in a Changing Europe conference on Brexit and Northern Ireland

As usual, I will be covering breaking political news as it happens, as well as
bringing you the best reaction, comment and analysis from the web. I plan to
post a summary at lunchtime and another in the afternoon.

You can read all today's Guardian politics stories here.

Here is the Politico Europe round-up of this morning's political news from Jack
Blanchard. And here is the PoliticsHome list of today' top 10 must reads.

If you want to follow me or contact me on Twitter, I'm on @AndrewSparrow.

I try to monitor the comments BTL but normally I find it impossible to read them
all. If you have a direct question, do include "Andrew" in it somewhere and I'm
more likely to find it. I do try to answer direct questions, although sometimes
I miss them or don't have time.

If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use
Twitter.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.15pm BST

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              11 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

Camp symbolises Berlin's tougher migrant stance;
Refugee policy. Bavarian compound ; More huge centres such as Manching are
planned amid a backlash against immigration

BYLINE: GUY CHAZAN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 852 words


"We are tired of living in camps," the sign said. "Please, we need transfer."

These words were held aloft this week by a group of angry Nigerians protesting
about living conditions in a migrant holding centre in the southern German town
of Manching, which is at the heart of a raging debate about the country's
refugee policy.

"A lot of people go crazy in this compound," said Kelvi Batin, one of the
demonstrators. "You're stuck here for eight months to a year, then they tell you
you have to go back to your country."

Daniel Waidelich, a Bavarian government official, observed the protest from
behind a security cordon. "These people want out. They want flats in the towns,
even when they've been denied asylum. That's not going to work."

This is the face of Germany's tough new approach on immigration. Residents are
cooped up here for months with little to do and minimal contact with the outside
world, unable to work or learn German.

If their asylum request is rejected, they are deported from Manching to their
homeland. Some 3,500 have been sent home since the centre was opened in 2015 -
1,000 forcibly.

Now plans are afoot to replicate the Manching model across Germany. Horst
Seehofer, interior minister, who as leader of Bavaria oversaw the creation of
facilities such as these, will soon unveil plans to build at least 40 socalled
"Anker" centres - based on the German words for arrival, decision and
repatriation - throughout the country.

It is all a big shift from Angela Merkel's open-door policy of 2015-16, when the
German chancellor threw open the country's borders to more than 1m refugees. But
it reflects a new political reality: the rise of the far-right Alternative for
Germany and a popular backlash against large-scale immigration.

However, the issue has driven a wedge between Ms Merkel's conservative bloc, the
CDU/CSU, and their Social Democrat coalition partners. SPD-governed regions are
reluctant to host the centres. "Have fun finding suitable sites," Boris
Pistorius, SPD interior minister of Lower Saxony told Mr Seehofer recently. Even
conservatives are sceptical. Lorenz Caffier, CDU interior minister of
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, worried aloud about the "potential for conflict" in
transit centres of such huge size. The German police union also lambasted the
idea of "isolating asylum-seekers for years on end in barrack-like conditions"
where a "substantial potential for aggression" might arise.

Charities say Manching is the wrong approach. "It's a negative place - the
anonymity, the sense of hopelessness," said Wilhelm Dräxler of Caritas. "The
people there have no future, and, because they can't work, no money."

In general, Germany has settled refugees in urban communities, where they rub
shoulders with their German neighbours and can more easily integrate. But
Bavaria has taken a different tack. From the start of the refugee crisis it has
housed migrants with little chance of staying in Germany - people, say, from
Nigeria, the Balkans or Ukraine - in big holding centres isolated from the local
population.

Locals in the affluent Bavarian town of Ingolstadt, about 13km from Manching,
are generally in favour. "If the refugees are settled in towns, where there are
five of them here and five there, that's a problem, because they just
disappear," said one man.

Officials argue that refugees can be processed more efficiently in large
centres, where immigration officials are on hand to deal with asylum requests
and legal officers to consider appeals. Mr Waidelich said residents stayed on
average four and-a-half months in Manching.

But for critics of the system, it is all happening too fast. "My biggest concern
is that people can't really exercise their full rights to asylum," said Gabriele
Störkle of Caritas. "The procedures are so speeded up they don't have an
opportunity to get proper legal advice." And in recent months, Manching has
become much less efficient. Many of the Nigerians are still stuck there months
after their asylum requests were rejected. "They can only be deported if they
have a valid passport or passport substitute, and a lot of them don't have
either," said Monika Goriss of the Bavarian aliens department. Refugees also
cannot be sent home if they are receiving medical treatment or appealing against
their asylum verdict.

"And a lot of them just disappear," Ms Goriss said. Authorities say that since
2015, 800 residents of Manching have gone into hiding before they were due to be
repatriated.

The open nature of the centre - residents can come and go more or less as they
please - means it is easy to abscond.

For those that remain, conditions are far from ideal. Officials say police were
called to the facility 355 times last year, mainly due to flare-ups between
residents. "When you have six to eight people in one room, conflict is
pre-programmed," said Mr Dräxler.

Residents of the migrant holding centre in Manching express their anger during a
demonstration last week Alexandra Beier/Getty

'A lot of people go crazy. You're stuck here for eight months, then they tell
you you have to go back to your country' Kelvi Batin, demonstrator

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              12 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

France and Germany to press on with eurozone reform;
Europe

BYLINE: JIM BRUNSDEN ;ANNE-SYLVAINE CHASSANY ;GUY CHAZAN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 489 words


France and Germany insist they will press ahead with talks on strengthening the
eurozone despite the emergence of a Eurosceptic coalition in Italy, with French
president Emmanuel Macron warning the EU faces a "moment of truth" at a summit
next month that will show whether it is capable of meaningful reform.

EU diplomats fear that economic policy could prove to be one of the main
battlegrounds between Brussels and an Italian government led by the Five Star
Movement and the far-right League, with the parties' pledge to overhaul EU
fiscal rules serving to deepen German misgivings about more risk-sharing among
members of the currency bloc.

But they said the political impetus from Paris meant work would continue on a
package of measures to be agreed in June, even if it is expected that the
situation in Rome will reinforce Germany's determination to link further
integration to progress by Italy and others in tackling problems in their
banking systems.

Berlin has made clear that plans championed by much of southern Europe for a
common scheme to guarantee bank deposits, known as Edis, can only be seen as a
long-term aim and that the reduction of stockpiles of non-performing loans in
Italian banks would be one prerequisite. It is a stance strongly shared by the
Netherlands and other northern members of the currency bloc.

"Whatever happens, Edis is dead, at least for the foreseeable future," one
adviser from Angela Merkel's CDU party told the Financial Times. "The common
backstop will come, but Edis will not. The chancellery, the finance ministry,
the CDU/CSU parliamentary group - none of them want it. You can't sell it to
German voters."

Negotiations are planned over coming weeks to address difficult topics such as
Germany's conditions for when the euro area bailout fund, the European Stability
Mechanism, could provide emergency money during banking crises. The eurogroup
Working Group, consisting of senior eurozone finance ministry officials, held
talks last week on the basis of slides, seen by the FT, setting out what the
June package might look like.

According to the slides, leaders would reach a "decision in principle" in June
that the ESM would become the bank backstop, with a maximum credit line of
(EURO)60bn, as well as settle the "key principles" on how it would work in
practice. There would also be a "decision on when to start political
discussions" on Edis.

In tandem, the summit would sign off a range of risk-reduction measures,
including on non-performing loans.

EU finance ministers are set to discuss the reform agenda at a meeting in
Brussels on Thursday.

"To further strengthen the euro area, all sides need to be pragmatic and move to
reach a deal," Valdis Dombrovskis, the European Commission vice-president in
charge of the euro, told the FT. "We must take steps forward even if they are
smaller than some had hoped." Additional reporting by Mehreen Khan in Brussels
and Harriet Agnew in Paris

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              13 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

Camp symbolises Berlin's tougher migrant stance;
Refugee policy. Bavarian compound ; More huge centres such as Manching are
planned amid a backlash against immigration

BYLINE: GUY CHAZAN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 852 words


"We are tired of living in camps," the sign said. "Please, we need transfer."

These words were held aloft this week by a group of angry Nigerians protesting
about living conditions in a migrant holding centre in the southern German town
of Manching, which is at the heart of a raging debate about the country's
refugee policy.

"A lot of people go crazy in this compound," said Kelvi Batin, one of the
demonstrators. "You're stuck here for eight months to a year, then they tell you
you have to go back to your country."

Daniel Waidelich, a Bavarian government official, observed the protest from
behind a security cordon. "These people want out. They want flats in the towns,
even when they've been denied asylum. That's not going to work."

This is the face of Germany's tough new approach on immigration. Residents are
cooped up here for months with little to do and minimal contact with the outside
world, unable to work or learn German.

If their asylum request is rejected, they are deported from Manching to their
homeland. Some 3,500 have been sent home since the centre was opened in 2015 -
1,000 forcibly.

Now plans are afoot to replicate the Manching model across Germany. Horst
Seehofer, interior minister, who as leader of Bavaria oversaw the creation of
facilities such as these, will soon unveil plans to build at least 40 socalled
"Anker" centres - based on the German words for arrival, decision and
repatriation - throughout the country.

It is all a big shift from Angela Merkel's open-door policy of 2015-16, when the
German chancellor threw open the country's borders to more than 1m refugees. But
it reflects a new political reality: the rise of the far-right Alternative for
Germany and a popular backlash against large-scale immigration.

However, the issue has driven a wedge between Ms Merkel's conservative bloc, the
CDU/CSU, and their Social Democrat coalition partners. SPD-governed regions are
reluctant to host the centres. "Have fun finding suitable sites," Boris
Pistorius, SPD interior minister of Lower Saxony told Mr Seehofer recently. Even
conservatives are sceptical. Lorenz Caffier, CDU interior minister of
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, worried aloud about the "potential for conflict" in
transit centres of such huge size. The German police union also lambasted the
idea of "isolating asylum-seekers for years on end in barrack-like conditions"
where a "substantial potential for aggression" might arise.

Charities say Manching is the wrong approach. "It's a negative place - the
anonymity, the sense of hopelessness," said Wilhelm Dräxler of Caritas. "The
people there have no future, and, because they can't work, no money."

In general, Germany has settled refugees in urban communities, where they rub
shoulders with their German neighbours and can more easily integrate. But
Bavaria has taken a different tack. From the start of the refugee crisis it has
housed migrants with little chance of staying in Germany - people, say, from
Nigeria, the Balkans or Ukraine - in big holding centres isolated from the local
population.

Locals in the affluent Bavarian town of Ingolstadt, about 13km from Manching,
are generally in favour. "If the refugees are settled in towns, where there are
five of them here and five there, that's a problem, because they just
disappear," said one man.

Officials argue that refugees can be processed more efficiently in large
centres, where immigration officials are on hand to deal with asylum requests
and legal officers to consider appeals. Mr Waidelich said residents stayed on
average four and-a-half months in Manching.

But for critics of the system, it is all happening too fast. "My biggest concern
is that people can't really exercise their full rights to asylum," said Gabriele
Störkle of Caritas. "The procedures are so speeded up they don't have an
opportunity to get proper legal advice." And in recent months, Manching has
become much less efficient. Many of the Nigerians are still stuck there months
after their asylum requests were rejected. "They can only be deported if they
have a valid passport or passport substitute, and a lot of them don't have
either," said Monika Goriss of the Bavarian aliens department. Refugees also
cannot be sent home if they are receiving medical treatment or appealing against
their asylum verdict.

"And a lot of them just disappear," Ms Goriss said. Authorities say that since
2015, 800 residents of Manching have gone into hiding before they were due to be
repatriated.

The open nature of the centre - residents can come and go more or less as they
please - means it is easy to abscond.

For those that remain, conditions are far from ideal. Officials say police were
called to the facility 355 times last year, mainly due to flare-ups between
residents. "When you have six to eight people in one room, conflict is
pre-programmed," said Mr Dräxler.

Residents of the migrant holding centre in Manching express their anger during a
demonstration last week Alexandra Beier/Getty

'A lot of people go crazy. You're stuck here for eight months, then they tell
you you have to go back to your country' Kelvi Batin, demonstrator

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              14 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

France and Germany to press on with eurozone reform;
Europe

BYLINE: JIM BRUNSDEN ;ANNE-SYLVAINE CHASSANY ;GUY CHAZAN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 489 words


France and Germany insist they will press ahead with talks on strengthening the
eurozone despite the emergence of a Eurosceptic coalition in Italy, with French
president Emmanuel Macron warning the EU faces a "moment of truth" at a summit
next month that will show whether it is capable of meaningful reform.

EU diplomats fear that economic policy could prove to be one of the main
battlegrounds between Brussels and an Italian government led by the Five Star
Movement and the far-right League, with the parties' pledge to overhaul EU
fiscal rules serving to deepen German misgivings about more risk-sharing among
members of the currency bloc.

But they said the political impetus from Paris meant work would continue on a
package of measures to be agreed in June, even if it is expected that the
situation in Rome will reinforce Germany's determination to link further
integration to progress by Italy and others in tackling problems in their
banking systems.

Berlin has made clear that plans championed by much of southern Europe for a
common scheme to guarantee bank deposits, known as Edis, can only be seen as a
long-term aim and that the reduction of stockpiles of non-performing loans in
Italian banks would be one prerequisite. It is a stance strongly shared by the
Netherlands and other northern members of the currency bloc.

"Whatever happens, Edis is dead, at least for the foreseeable future," one
adviser from Angela Merkel's CDU party told the Financial Times. "The common
backstop will come, but Edis will not. The chancellery, the finance ministry,
the CDU/CSU parliamentary group - none of them want it. You can't sell it to
German voters."

Negotiations are planned over coming weeks to address difficult topics such as
Germany's conditions for when the euro area bailout fund, the European Stability
Mechanism, could provide emergency money during banking crises. The eurogroup
Working Group, consisting of senior eurozone finance ministry officials, held
talks last week on the basis of slides, seen by the FT, setting out what the
June package might look like.

According to the slides, leaders would reach a "decision in principle" in June
that the ESM would become the bank backstop, with a maximum credit line of
(EURO)60bn, as well as settle the "key principles" on how it would work in
practice. There would also be a "decision on when to start political
discussions" on Edis.

In tandem, the summit would sign off a range of risk-reduction measures,
including on non-performing loans.

EU finance ministers are set to discuss the reform agenda at a meeting in
Brussels on Thursday.

"To further strengthen the euro area, all sides need to be pragmatic and move to
reach a deal," Valdis Dombrovskis, the European Commission vice-president in
charge of the euro, told the FT. "We must take steps forward even if they are
smaller than some had hoped." Additional reporting by Mehreen Khan in Brussels
and Harriet Agnew in Paris

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              15 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Camp symbolises Berlin's tougher migrant stance;
Refugee policy. Bavarian compound ; More huge centres such as Manching are
planned amid a backlash against immigration

BYLINE: GUY CHAZAN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 852 words


"We are tired of living in camps," the sign said. "Please, we need transfer."

These words were held aloft this week by a group of angry Nigerians protesting
about living conditions in a migrant holding centre in the southern German town
of Manching, which is at the heart of a raging debate about the country's
refugee policy.

"A lot of people go crazy in this compound," said Kelvi Batin, one of the
demonstrators. "You're stuck here for eight months to a year, then they tell you
you have to go back to your country."

Daniel Waidelich, a Bavarian government official, observed the protest from
behind a security cordon. "These people want out. They want flats in the towns,
even when they've been denied asylum. That's not going to work."

This is the face of Germany's tough new approach on immigration. Residents are
cooped up here for months with little to do and minimal contact with the outside
world, unable to work or learn German.

If their asylum request is rejected, they are deported from Manching to their
homeland. Some 3,500 have been sent home since the centre was opened in 2015 -
1,000 forcibly.

Now plans are afoot to replicate the Manching model across Germany. Horst
Seehofer, interior minister, who as leader of Bavaria oversaw the creation of
facilities such as these, will soon unveil plans to build at least 40 socalled
"Anker" centres - based on the German words for arrival, decision and
repatriation - throughout the country.

It is all a big shift from Angela Merkel's open-door policy of 2015-16, when the
German chancellor threw open the country's borders to more than 1m refugees. But
it reflects a new political reality: the rise of the far-right Alternative for
Germany and a popular backlash against large-scale immigration.

However, the issue has driven a wedge between Ms Merkel's conservative bloc, the
CDU/CSU, and their Social Democrat coalition partners. SPD-governed regions are
reluctant to host the centres. "Have fun finding suitable sites," Boris
Pistorius, SPD interior minister of Lower Saxony told Mr Seehofer recently. Even
conservatives are sceptical. Lorenz Caffier, CDU interior minister of
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, worried aloud about the "potential for conflict" in
transit centres of such huge size. The German police union also lambasted the
idea of "isolating asylum-seekers for years on end in barrack-like conditions"
where a "substantial potential for aggression" might arise.

Charities say Manching is the wrong approach. "It's a negative place - the
anonymity, the sense of hopelessness," said Wilhelm Dräxler of Caritas. "The
people there have no future, and, because they can't work, no money."

In general, Germany has settled refugees in urban communities, where they rub
shoulders with their German neighbours and can more easily integrate. But
Bavaria has taken a different tack. From the start of the refugee crisis it has
housed migrants with little chance of staying in Germany - people, say, from
Nigeria, the Balkans or Ukraine - in big holding centres isolated from the local
population.

Locals in the affluent Bavarian town of Ingolstadt, about 13km from Manching,
are generally in favour. "If the refugees are settled in towns, where there are
five of them here and five there, that's a problem, because they just
disappear," said one man.

Officials argue that refugees can be processed more efficiently in large
centres, where immigration officials are on hand to deal with asylum requests
and legal officers to consider appeals. Mr Waidelich said residents stayed on
average four and-a-half months in Manching.

But for critics of the system, it is all happening too fast. "My biggest concern
is that people can't really exercise their full rights to asylum," said Gabriele
Störkle of Caritas. "The procedures are so speeded up they don't have an
opportunity to get proper legal advice." And in recent months, Manching has
become much less efficient. Many of the Nigerians are still stuck there months
after their asylum requests were rejected. "They can only be deported if they
have a valid passport or passport substitute, and a lot of them don't have
either," said Monika Goriss of the Bavarian aliens department. Refugees also
cannot be sent home if they are receiving medical treatment or appealing against
their asylum verdict.

"And a lot of them just disappear," Ms Goriss said. Authorities say that since
2015, 800 residents of Manching have gone into hiding before they were due to be
repatriated.

The open nature of the centre - residents can come and go more or less as they
please - means it is easy to abscond.

For those that remain, conditions are far from ideal. Officials say police were
called to the facility 355 times last year, mainly due to flare-ups between
residents. "When you have six to eight people in one room, conflict is
pre-programmed," said Mr Dräxler.

Residents of the migrant holding centre in Manching express their anger during a
demonstration last week Alexandra Beier/Getty

'A lot of people go crazy. You're stuck here for eight months, then they tell
you you have to go back to your country' Kelvi Batin, demonstrator

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              16 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

France and Germany to press on with eurozone reform;
Europe

BYLINE: JIM BRUNSDEN ;ANNE-SYLVAINE CHASSANY ;GUY CHAZAN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 489 words


France and Germany insist they will press ahead with talks on strengthening the
eurozone despite the emergence of a Eurosceptic coalition in Italy, with French
president Emmanuel Macron warning the EU faces a "moment of truth" at a summit
next month that will show whether it is capable of meaningful reform.

EU diplomats fear that economic policy could prove to be one of the main
battlegrounds between Brussels and an Italian government led by the Five Star
Movement and the far-right League, with the parties' pledge to overhaul EU
fiscal rules serving to deepen German misgivings about more risk-sharing among
members of the currency bloc.

But they said the political impetus from Paris meant work would continue on a
package of measures to be agreed in June, even if it is expected that the
situation in Rome will reinforce Germany's determination to link further
integration to progress by Italy and others in tackling problems in their
banking systems.

Berlin has made clear that plans championed by much of southern Europe for a
common scheme to guarantee bank deposits, known as Edis, can only be seen as a
long-term aim and that the reduction of stockpiles of non-performing loans in
Italian banks would be one prerequisite. It is a stance strongly shared by the
Netherlands and other northern members of the currency bloc.

"Whatever happens, Edis is dead, at least for the foreseeable future," one
adviser from Angela Merkel's CDU party told the Financial Times. "The common
backstop will come, but Edis will not. The chancellery, the finance ministry,
the CDU/CSU parliamentary group - none of them want it. You can't sell it to
German voters."

Negotiations are planned over coming weeks to address difficult topics such as
Germany's conditions for when the euro area bailout fund, the European Stability
Mechanism, could provide emergency money during banking crises. The eurogroup
Working Group, consisting of senior eurozone finance ministry officials, held
talks last week on the basis of slides, seen by the FT, setting out what the
June package might look like.

According to the slides, leaders would reach a "decision in principle" in June
that the ESM would become the bank backstop, with a maximum credit line of
(EURO)60bn, as well as settle the "key principles" on how it would work in
practice. There would also be a "decision on when to start political
discussions" on Edis.

In tandem, the summit would sign off a range of risk-reduction measures,
including on non-performing loans.

EU finance ministers are set to discuss the reform agenda at a meeting in
Brussels on Thursday.

"To further strengthen the euro area, all sides need to be pragmatic and move to
reach a deal," Valdis Dombrovskis, the European Commission vice-president in
charge of the euro, told the FT. "We must take steps forward even if they are
smaller than some had hoped." Additional reporting by Mehreen Khan in Brussels
and Harriet Agnew in Paris

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              17 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

Camp symbolises Berlin's tougher migrant stance;
Refugee policy. Bavarian compound ; More huge centres such as Manching are
planned amid a backlash against immigration

BYLINE: GUY CHAZAN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 852 words


"We are tired of living in camps," the sign said. "Please, we need transfer."

These words were held aloft this week by a group of angry Nigerians protesting
about living conditions in a migrant holding centre in the southern German town
of Manching, which is at the heart of a raging debate about the country's
refugee policy.

"A lot of people go crazy in this compound," said Kelvi Batin, one of the
demonstrators. "You're stuck here for eight months to a year, then they tell you
you have to go back to your country."

Daniel Waidelich, a Bavarian government official, observed the protest from
behind a security cordon. "These people want out. They want flats in the towns,
even when they've been denied asylum. That's not going to work."

This is the face of Germany's tough new approach on immigration. Residents are
cooped up here for months with little to do and minimal contact with the outside
world, unable to work or learn German.

If their asylum request is rejected, they are deported from Manching to their
homeland. Some 3,500 have been sent home since the centre was opened in 2015 -
1,000 forcibly.

Now plans are afoot to replicate the Manching model across Germany. Horst
Seehofer, interior minister, who as leader of Bavaria oversaw the creation of
facilities such as these, will soon unveil plans to build at least 40 socalled
"Anker" centres - based on the German words for arrival, decision and
repatriation - throughout the country.

It is all a big shift from Angela Merkel's open-door policy of 2015-16, when the
German chancellor threw open the country's borders to more than 1m refugees. But
it reflects a new political reality: the rise of the far-right Alternative for
Germany and a popular backlash against large-scale immigration.

However, the issue has driven a wedge between Ms Merkel's conservative bloc, the
CDU/CSU, and their Social Democrat coalition partners. SPD-governed regions are
reluctant to host the centres. "Have fun finding suitable sites," Boris
Pistorius, SPD interior minister of Lower Saxony told Mr Seehofer recently. Even
conservatives are sceptical. Lorenz Caffier, CDU interior minister of
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, worried aloud about the "potential for conflict" in
transit centres of such huge size. The German police union also lambasted the
idea of "isolating asylum-seekers for years on end in barrack-like conditions"
where a "substantial potential for aggression" might arise.

Charities say Manching is the wrong approach. "It's a negative place - the
anonymity, the sense of hopelessness," said Wilhelm Dräxler of Caritas. "The
people there have no future, and, because they can't work, no money."

In general, Germany has settled refugees in urban communities, where they rub
shoulders with their German neighbours and can more easily integrate. But
Bavaria has taken a different tack. From the start of the refugee crisis it has
housed migrants with little chance of staying in Germany - people, say, from
Nigeria, the Balkans or Ukraine - in big holding centres isolated from the local
population.

Locals in the affluent Bavarian town of Ingolstadt, about 13km from Manching,
are generally in favour. "If the refugees are settled in towns, where there are
five of them here and five there, that's a problem, because they just
disappear," said one man.

Officials argue that refugees can be processed more efficiently in large
centres, where immigration officials are on hand to deal with asylum requests
and legal officers to consider appeals. Mr Waidelich said residents stayed on
average four and-a-half months in Manching.

But for critics of the system, it is all happening too fast. "My biggest concern
is that people can't really exercise their full rights to asylum," said Gabriele
Störkle of Caritas. "The procedures are so speeded up they don't have an
opportunity to get proper legal advice." And in recent months, Manching has
become much less efficient. Many of the Nigerians are still stuck there months
after their asylum requests were rejected. "They can only be deported if they
have a valid passport or passport substitute, and a lot of them don't have
either," said Monika Goriss of the Bavarian aliens department. Refugees also
cannot be sent home if they are receiving medical treatment or appealing against
their asylum verdict.

"And a lot of them just disappear," Ms Goriss said. Authorities say that since
2015, 800 residents of Manching have gone into hiding before they were due to be
repatriated.

The open nature of the centre - residents can come and go more or less as they
please - means it is easy to abscond.

For those that remain, conditions are far from ideal. Officials say police were
called to the facility 355 times last year, mainly due to flare-ups between
residents. "When you have six to eight people in one room, conflict is
pre-programmed," said Mr Dräxler.

Residents of the migrant holding centre in Manching express their anger during a
demonstration last week Alexandra Beier/Getty

'A lot of people go crazy. You're stuck here for eight months, then they tell
you you have to go back to your country' Kelvi Batin, demonstrator

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              18 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

France and Germany to press on with eurozone reform;
Europe

BYLINE: JIM BRUNSDEN ;ANNE-SYLVAINE CHASSANY ;GUY CHAZAN

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 489 words


France and Germany insist they will press ahead with talks on strengthening the
eurozone despite the emergence of a Eurosceptic coalition in Italy, with French
president Emmanuel Macron warning the EU faces a "moment of truth" at a summit
next month that will show whether it is capable of meaningful reform.

EU diplomats fear that economic policy could prove to be one of the main
battlegrounds between Brussels and an Italian government led by the Five Star
Movement and the far-right League, with the parties' pledge to overhaul EU
fiscal rules serving to deepen German misgivings about more risk-sharing among
members of the currency bloc.

But they said the political impetus from Paris meant work would continue on a
package of measures to be agreed in June, even if it is expected that the
situation in Rome will reinforce Germany's determination to link further
integration to progress by Italy and others in tackling problems in their
banking systems.

Berlin has made clear that plans championed by much of southern Europe for a
common scheme to guarantee bank deposits, known as Edis, can only be seen as a
long-term aim and that the reduction of stockpiles of non-performing loans in
Italian banks would be one prerequisite. It is a stance strongly shared by the
Netherlands and other northern members of the currency bloc.

"Whatever happens, Edis is dead, at least for the foreseeable future," one
adviser from Angela Merkel's CDU party told the Financial Times. "The common
backstop will come, but Edis will not. The chancellery, the finance ministry,
the CDU/CSU parliamentary group - none of them want it. You can't sell it to
German voters."

Negotiations are planned over coming weeks to address difficult topics such as
Germany's conditions for when the euro area bailout fund, the European Stability
Mechanism, could provide emergency money during banking crises. The eurogroup
Working Group, consisting of senior eurozone finance ministry officials, held
talks last week on the basis of slides, seen by the FT, setting out what the
June package might look like.

According to the slides, leaders would reach a "decision in principle" in June
that the ESM would become the bank backstop, with a maximum credit line of
(EURO)60bn, as well as settle the "key principles" on how it would work in
practice. There would also be a "decision on when to start political
discussions" on Edis.

In tandem, the summit would sign off a range of risk-reduction measures,
including on non-performing loans.

EU finance ministers are set to discuss the reform agenda at a meeting in
Brussels on Thursday.

"To further strengthen the euro area, all sides need to be pragmatic and move to
reach a deal," Valdis Dombrovskis, the European Commission vice-president in
charge of the euro, told the FT. "We must take steps forward even if they are
smaller than some had hoped." Additional reporting by Mehreen Khan in Brussels
and Harriet Agnew in Paris

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              19 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

Germany to build refugee camps to tackle backlash

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 75 words


Two years after Angela Merkel's policy to open Germany's borders to more than 1m
refugees, the country is trying to cope with a backlash against immigration. In
a tough new approach to dealing with refugees, Germany is planning to build at
least 40 migrant camps across the country - replicating a holding centre in the
German town of Manching, from which some 3,500 people have been sent home since
it opened in 2015.

Berlin's tough approach ? PAGE 3

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              20 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                        May 21, 2018 Monday 6:00 AM GMT

Germany to roll out mass holding centres for asylum seekers;
'Anchor' camps will undermine country's reputation for being welcoming, say
critics

BYLINE: Philip Oltermann in Manching

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 985 words


Mass holding centres that Germany's interior ministry wants to roll out across
the country will stoke social tension between locals and migrants and undermine
the welcoming image the country has gained in the eyes of the world, aid
organisations have said.

So-called anchor centres - an acronym for arrival, decision, return - are
designed to speed up deportations of unsuccessful asylum seekers, by containing
large groups of people and the authorities who rule on their claims inside the
same holding facility.

Until now, Germany's policy has been to embed new arrivals in communities across
the country. But Angela Merkel's government is seeking to reverse its strategy,
as a populist backlash builds against the chancellor's handling of the refugee
crisis.

"We all know how difficult it is to deport people without protected status after
they have been spread out across the country and put down roots in our cities
and communities," the interior minister, Horst Seehofer, told the German
parliament last week.

"In the future the end of an asylum application will coincide with the start of
the deportation procedure," said the leader of the CSU and former Bavarian state
premier, adding that he wanted to see states set up the new centres this autumn.

But the transit centre in Seehofer's home state that is meant to work as a
prototype for the scheme has experienced high crime rates, mass protests and
rising tensions between asylum seekers and security forces, the Guardian found
during a visit to the Max-Immelmann barracks in Manching.

The converted army compound is part of a complex outside Ingolstadt, Upper
Bavaria, that holds about 1,100 people, mainly from the west Balkans, Ukraine,
Nigeria and Afghanistan.

"It is like a prison," said Lucky Raphael, 24, from Nigeria, who said inmates
were not allowed to lock their rooms, cook their own food, or go outside to seek
work or attend school. "We can go outside, but always in the fear that we could
be arrested," said Raphael, who said he left his home country because of his
dire economic and social circumstances, and arrived in Bavaria via Italy.

Raphael said had been living in the Manching transit centre for 11 months,
though authorities say the average length of stay for people who have arrived
here since September 2015 is four-and-a-half months.

Bavarian authorities hope to speed up the checking process with technology. They
analyse metadata on smartphones and run speech samples through a "voice
geometry" programme to determine the travel route and ethnic background of
applicants who do not have passports.

They are reacting to an increasingly heated political debate about Germany's
failure to deport asylum seekers whose applications have been rejected. Anis
Amri, a Tunisian who in December 2016 killed 12 people by driving a truck into a
crowd at a Berlin Christmas market, had been rejected but not deported. In 2017,
about half a million unsuccessful asylum seekers remained in the country.

Anchor centres "send out a signal to people who have low chances of being
allowed to stay," said Daniel Waidelich of the Upper Bavarian government. "It's
not worth coming to Germany, because your claim is processed very quickly here."
Since September 2015, the centre in Manching has carried out 1,000 deportations,
while 2,500 inmates have left voluntarily.

Critics say the new centres create an absurd double-bind on those inmates at the
transit centres who have realistic chances of being granted asylum: while they
are actively hindered from integrating into German society while their
application is pending, they are expected to immediately integrate as soon as
they get the all-clear.

Of asylum applications from Nigeria in Upper Bavaria, 17% have succeeded in
gaining the applicants protected status, many of them women who have been forced
into prostitution, others Christian minorities persecuted by Boko Haram in the
country's north-east.

"Integration is like a four-legged table," said Willi Dräxler of the Catholic
aid charity Caritas, which has four people doing regular voluntary work at
Manching. "Language, contacts in the local community, a job and a home are all
vital ingredients. If you saw off one leg, the table is going to wobble. Within
these transit centres, however, integration isn't happening at all."

Inside the centres, frustration with long waits often boils over. "We are not
told why we are here," said Kelvi Batin, also from Nigeria. "It would be better
if they told us straight away when we arrived that we cannot stay".

While Manching has not seen incidents like the one at a centre in Ellwangen,
Baden-Württemberg, where 200 asylum seekers tried prevent the deportation of one
inmate, police have to intervene at the compound on a daily basis. In 2017 the
police were called 355 times to the Manching transit centre complex.

During a recent media tour of the premises, a group of Nigerians staged an
impromptu protest, chanting "We want our freedom" and holding up handmade signs
reading: "We're tired of living in camps. Please, we need transfer."

Dräxler said: "Protests about seemingly small issues like food are often
actually protests about the conditions in these centres as a whole. The main
source of troubles is that the people inside have no perspective and aren't
allowed to work."

The inability of the migrants inside the centre to engage themselves in the
community was also stoking resentment and prejudice among the local population,
said Gabriele Störkle of the Caritas centre in Pfaffenhofen. "These transit
centres are like black boxes; the local population isn't allowed to go inside,
so they project all their greatest fear into what is going on inside them."

"Three years ago, Germany was globally admired for its welcoming culture - the
pictures from train stations in Munich travelled around the world," said
Dräxler. "What has happened to that culture? Now there is only fear of
refugees."

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              21 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                        The Independent - Daily Edition

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                 First Edition

Crack down on oligarchs close to Putin, MPs tell May

BYLINE: KIM SENGUPTA DIPLOMATIC EDITOR

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1189 words


The British government should impose sweeping sanctions on oligarchs and
officials close to Vladimir Putin and apply punitive laws to counter the "full
spectrum of the offensive measures" being used by Russia, a report by the
Commons Foreign Affairs Committee has demanded.

"The use of London as a base for the corrupt assets of Kremlin-connected
individuals is now clearly linked to a wider Russian strategy and has
implications for our national security: combating it should be a major UK
foreign policy priority," claim the MPs.

The report, "Moscow's Gold: Russian Corruption in the UK", accuses the British
government of failing to follow up condemnation of Kremlin aggression with
credible action. "The robust rhetoric from the prime minister following the
attempted murder of Sergei Skripal and his daughter" it says "has been
undermined by the 'business as usual' sign hanging on the UK's front door'."

The committee wants to see tough action from the government including:

* stopping companies which are sanctioned in other countries from trading in
London

* closing of "loopholes" which allow debt issuance to be used to go around
sanctions

* individuals close to President Putin's government sanctioned

* a crackdown on money laundering focusing on ownership of luxury property in
the UK and dependant territories.

"The assets stored and laundered in London both directly and indirectly support
President Putin's campaign to subvert the international rules-based system,
undermine our allies, and erode the mutually-reinforcing international networks
that support UK foreign policy", says the report. "Turning a blind eye to
London's role in hiding the proceeds of Kremlin-connected corruption risks
signalling that the UK is not serious about confronting the full spectrum of
President Putin's offensive measures."

Campaigners against the Putin government have been pressing the UK to adopt a
version of the Magnitsky Act which was brought in by the Obama administration
following the death of Sergei Magnitsky, a Russian lawyer and whistleblower,
under violent suspicious circumstances in a Moscow prison. The US legislation
allows the targeting of Russian state personnel who are deemed to have been
involved in Mr Magnitsky's death.

The UK parliament is in the process of passing a version of the Magnitsky Act
under which Russian nationals responsible for human rights violations as well as
engaging in activities against Britain such as the Salisbury poisoning can be
prosecuted. The Foreign Affairs Committee points to the London flotation of EN+
an energy company part owned by VTB, a Russian state-owned bank which has been
sanctioned by the US and EU. EN+ was owned by Oleg Deripaska, an oligarch who is
close to Mr Putin, who has since stepped down from the board of the company in
an attempt to lift American sanctions.

The report charts how, just days after the UK expelled 23 Russian diplomats
following the Salisbury attack, the Russian government was able to raise £3bn in
Eurobond issuance and the Russian energy multinational Gazprom PJSC made a £500m
sale followed by the Russian embassy in London tweeting "business as usual".

The Sanctions and Anti-Money Laundering Bill is currently in the final stages of
passing through the Commons after going through the Lords. The MPs state: "We
welcome the bill's broad definition of the purpose of sanctions regulations,
which will give the government the power to introduce sanctions for a range of
reasons..." But the MPs want a register of overseas owners of properties in this
country to be brought forward from the proposed date of 2021 and naming and
shaming of individuals "comparable to the US Magnitsky List" to be made public
and updated by the Foreign Office.

The committee's chairperson, Conservative MP Tom Tugdenhat, said: "We must be
united in our efforts to match rhetoric with action - in the City, through
government policy and among allies in the US, G7 and EU. We call on the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office to set out a coherent strategy on Russia that clearly
links together the diplomatic, military and financial tools that the UK can use
to counter Russian state aggression."

The report, however, does not reveal any new information about Russian money and
corruption in the UK, drawing instead on existing public material, and
statements by journalists, academics and researchers. There is a degree of
scepticism about whether Theresa May's government will rush to investigate and
prosecute on this issue near future; laws which already exist to do so have not
been much used.

Successive British governments have actively encouraged rich foreigners to come
to this country and a slew of prosecutions, which, to apply the law equitably,
would mean targeting of other nationalities as well as Russians is likely to
result in money being moved out, capital flight, at a time of economic
uncertainty and trepidation following Brexit. Widespread international support
for further punitive action is also unlikely. The British government has
suspended senior level interaction with Moscow, but other Western states have
not. Although a number of allied countries expelled Russians working under
diplomatic accreditation following the Skripal attack, contact has continued as
normal at the highest level.

Angela Merkel has just met Mr Putin in Sochi where topics under discussion
included Nord Stream 2, a project to pipe Russian gas to Germany. French
President Emmanuel Macron will meet Mr Putin in St Petersburg this week, and the
populist coalition due to form Italy's next government has stated that it will
lift sanctions placed on Russia over Ukraine. In the US, Donald Trump - under
investigation over claims that Moscow helped to put him in the White House -
recently signed a new set of congressional sanctions on Russia, only after
resisting doing so for months. And although America threw out 60 Russian
diplomats over the Skripals, the US president is reported to have claimed
subsequently that he had been misled into expelling a far larger number than he
has intended.

The Russian ambassador to London, Alexander Yakovenko, acknowledged that his
country's relationship with Britain is now worse than with any other Western
state. "This Conservative government should really examine its policy towards
Russia and why it has reached this level. Some British politicians should also
think about the kind of language they use, there are some people who are
determined to make matters worse instead of better," he said. "If the British
government brings in these laws targeting Russians in the UK then the Russians
can take the matter to court, I believe a lot of them are preparing for this
already and preparing legal cases. This is something which should be open to
them, after all we keep being told that the UK is a country of laws."

Mr Yakovenko wanted to stress that although the British government had chosen to
break off high level liaison, other heads of state have maintained "links which
are so essential" in the troubled international political climate. The Japanese
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will be in Russia at the same time as Mr Macron.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2018 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                              22 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                        The Independent - Daily Edition

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                 Second Edition

Crack down on oligarchs close to Putin, MPs tell May

BYLINE: KIM SENGUPTA DIPLOMATIC EDITOR

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1191 words


The British government should impose sweeping sanctions on oligarchs and
officials close to Vladimir Putin and apply punitive laws to counter the "full
spectrum of the offensive measures" being used by Russia, a report by the
Commons Foreign Affairs Committee has demanded.

"The use of London as a base for the corrupt assets of Kremlin-connected
individuals is now clearly linked to a wider Russian strategy and has
implications for our national security: combating it should be a major UK
foreign policy priority," claim the MPs.

The report, "Moscow's Gold: Russian Corruption in the UK", accuses the British
government of failing to follow up condemnation of Kremlin aggression with
credible action. "The robust rhetoric from the prime minister following the
attempted murder of Sergei Skripal and his daughter" it says "has been
undermined by the 'business as usual' sign hanging on the UK's front door'."

The committee wants to see tough action from the government including:

* stopping companies which are sanctioned in other countries from trading in
London

* closing of "loopholes" which allow debt issuance to be used to go around
sanctions

* individuals close to Vladimir Putin's government sanctioned

* a crackdown on money laundering focusing on ownership of luxury property in
the UK and dependant territories.

"The assets stored and laundered in London both directly and indirectly support
President Putin's campaign to subvert the international rules-based system,
undermine our allies, and erode the mutually-reinforcing international networks
that support UK foreign policy", says the report. "Turning a blind eye to
London's role in hiding the proceeds of Kremlin-connected corruption risks
signalling that the UK is not serious about confronting the full spectrum of
President Putin's offensive measures."

Campaigners against the Putin government have been pressing the UK to adopt a
version of the Magnitsky Act which was brought in by the Obama administration
following the death of Sergei Magnitsky, a Russian lawyer and whistleblower,
under violent suspicious circumstances in a Moscow prison. The US legislation
allows the targeting of Russian state personnel who are deemed to have been
involved in Mr Magnitsky's death.

The UK parliament is in the process of passing a version of the Magnitsky Act
under which Russian nationals responsible for human rights violations as well as
engaging in activities against Britain such as the Salisbury nerve agent attack
can be prosecuted. The Foreign Affairs Committee points to the London flotation
of EN+ an energy company part owned by VTB, a Russian state-owned bank which has
been sanctioned by the US and EU. EN+ was owned by Oleg Deripaska, an oligarch
who is close to Mr Putin, who has since stepped down from the board of the
company in an attempt to lift American sanctions.

The report charts how, just days after the UK expelled 23 Russian diplomats
following the Salisbury attack, the Russian government was able to raise £3bn in
Eurobond issuance and the Russian energy multinational Gazprom PJSC made a £500m
sale followed by the Russian embassy in London tweeting "business as usual".

The Sanctions and Anti-Money Laundering Bill is currently in the final stages of
passing through the Commons after going through the Lords. The MPs state: "We
welcome the bill's broad definition of the purpose of sanctions regulations,
which will give the government the power to introduce sanctions for a range of
reasons..." But the MPs want a register of overseas owners of properties in this
country to be brought forward from the proposed date of 2021 and naming and
shaming of individuals "comparable to the US Magnitsky List" to be made public
and updated by the Foreign Office.

The committee's chairperson, Conservative MP Tom Tugdenhat, said: "We must be
united in our efforts to match rhetoric with action - in the City, through
government policy and among allies in the US, G7 and EU. We call on the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office to set out a coherent strategy on Russia that clearly
links together the diplomatic, military and financial tools that the UK can use
to counter Russian state aggression."

The report, however, does not reveal any new information about Russian money and
corruption in the UK, drawing instead on existing public material, and
statements by journalists, academics and researchers. There is a degree of
scepticism about whether Theresa May's government will rush to investigate and
prosecute on this issue in the near future; laws which already exist to do so
have not been much used.

Successive British governments have actively encouraged rich foreigners to come
to this country and a slew of prosecutions, which, to apply the law equitably,
would mean targeting of other nationalities as well as Russians is likely to
result in money being moved out, capital flight, at a time of economic
uncertainty and trepidation following Brexit. Widespread international support
for further punitive action is also unlikely. The British government has
suspended senior level interaction with Moscow, but other Western states have
not. Although a number of allied countries expelled Russians working under
diplomatic accreditation following the Skripal attack, contact has continued as
normal at the highest level.

Angela Merkel has just met Mr Putin in Sochi where topics under discussion
included Nord Stream 2, a project to pipe Russian gas to Germany. French
President Emmanuel Macron will meet Mr Putin in St Petersburg this week, and the
populist coalition due to form Italy's next government has stated that it will
lift sanctions placed on Russia over Ukraine. In the US, Donald Trump - under
investigation over claims that Moscow helped to put him in the White House -
recently signed a new set of congressional sanctions on Russia, only after
resisting doing so for months. And although America threw out 60 Russian
diplomats over the Skripals, the US president is reported to have claimed
subsequently that he had been misled into expelling a far larger number than he
has intended.

The Russian ambassador to London, Alexander Yakovenko, acknowledged that his
country's relationship with Britain is now worse than with any other Western
state. "This Conservative government should really examine its policy towards
Russia and why it has reached this level. Some British politicians should also
think about the kind of language they use, there are some people who are
determined to make matters worse instead of better," he said. "If the British
government brings in these laws targeting Russians in the UK then the Russians
can take the matter to court, I believe a lot of them are preparing for this
already and preparing legal cases. This is something which should be open to
them, after all we keep being told that the UK is a country of laws."

Mr Yakovenko wanted to stress that although the British government had chosen to
break off high level liaison, other heads of state have maintained "links which
are so essential" in the troubled international political climate. The Japanese
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will be in Russia at the same time as Mr Macron.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2018 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                              23 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Trade war 'on hold' as China agrees talks

BYLINE: Richard Lloyd Parry, David Charter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 502 words


The prospect of an American trade war with China is "on hold" after Beijing
agreed to buy more energy and farm goods, senior US officials said yesterday.

Round-the-clock talks in Washington paved the way for further negotiations on
closing the $375 billion trade gap with China, long the target of threatened
tariffs by President Trump.

However, the US failed to win a commitment from China to buy US goods in
sufficient quantities to narrow the trade gap by $200 billion by 2020. The
commitment to further talks was con-firmed by Steven Mnuchin, the US Treasury
secretary, as Angela Merkel prepared to visit China this week as part of her own
push to co-ordinate moves against US protectionist threats.

The German chancellor also wants to work with China on salvaging the Iran
nuclear deal, worth billions to companies from both countries, after Mr Trump's
withdrawal and warnings of US sanctions against those continuing to trade with
Tehran.

Mr Mnuchin and Larry Kudlow, chief economic adviser to Mr Trump, said yesterday
that the US-China agreement set up a framework for addressing trade imbalances.
"We are putting the trade war on hold," Mr Mnuchin told Fox News Sunday. "Right
now, we have agreed to put the tariffs on hold while we try to execute the
framework."

Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, plans to go to China soon to discuss
increased Chinese imports of US energy, including liquefied natural gas, and
agriculture and manufactured goods. Mr Mnuchin said that the US expected an
increase of between 35 and 40 per cent in US agricultural exports to China and a
doubling of energy purchases over the next three to five years. China argues,
and many economists agree, that the trade balance between the two massive
economies depends less on trade policy than on national and international trends
in consumption and savings patterns, beyond the short-term control of
governments.

Nonetheless, in the face of insistent criticism by Mr Trump, Beijing has
proposed buying more cars, energy and farm products. It has also asked
Washington to remove a ban on sales to China of technology that is sold freely
to other countries.

In return China has asked for an urgent reversal of devastating sanctions
imposed on the giant technology company ZTE for trading with Iran and North
Korea, a concession Mr Trump has indicated he is willing to make.

Mrs Merkel is stepping up her pragmatic realpolitik after finding some common
cause with President Putin on Friday over their mutual antipathy to US positions
on Iran and trade, notably over Russian gas sales to Germany.

Berlin has numerous complaints about Chinese behaviour but Mrs Merkel has
decided to emphasise common concerns in the face of Mr Trump's America First
policies.

In a her weekly video message Mrs Merkel said that discussions in China would
include important issues such as the rule of law and ensuring equal access to
each other's markets. Her two-day visit starting on Thursday will include talks
with President Xi and Li Keqiang, the prime minister.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              24 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Trade war 'on hold' as China agrees talks

BYLINE: Richard Lloyd Parry ;David Charter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 502 words


The prospect of an American trade war with China is "on hold" after Beijing
agreed to buy more energy and farm goods, senior US officials said yesterday.

Round-the-clock talks in Washington paved the way for further negotiations on
closing the $375 billion trade gap with China, long the target of threatened
tariffs by President Trump.

However, the US failed to win a commitment from China to buy US goods in
sufficient quantities to narrow the trade gap by $200 billion by 2020. The
commitment to further talks was con-firmed by Steven Mnuchin, the US Treasury
secretary, as Angela Merkel prepared to visit China this week as part of her own
push to co-ordinate moves against US protectionist threats.

The German chancellor also wants to work with China on salvaging the Iran
nuclear deal, worth billions to companies from both countries, after Mr Trump's
withdrawal and warnings of US sanctions against those continuing to trade with
Tehran.

Mr Mnuchin and Larry Kudlow, chief economic adviser to Mr Trump, said yesterday
that the US-China agreement set up a framework for addressing trade imbalances.
"We are putting the trade war on hold," Mr Mnuchin told Fox News Sunday. "Right
now, we have agreed to put the tariffs on hold while we try to execute the
framework."

Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, plans to go to China soon to discuss
increased Chinese imports of US energy, including liquefied natural gas, and
agriculture and manufactured goods. Mr Mnuchin said that the US expected an
increase of between 35 and 40 per cent in US agricultural exports to China and a
doubling of energy purchases over the next three to five years. China argues,
and many economists agree, that the trade balance between the two massive
economies depends less on trade policy than on national and international trends
in consumption and savings patterns, beyond the short-term control of
governments.

Nonetheless, in the face of insistent criticism by Mr Trump, Beijing has
proposed buying more cars, energy and farm products. It has also asked
Washington to remove a ban on sales to China of technology that is sold freely
to other countries.

In return China has asked for an urgent reversal of devastating sanctions
imposed on the giant technology company ZTE for trading with Iran and North
Korea, a concession Mr Trump has indicated he is willing to make.

Mrs Merkel is stepping up her pragmatic realpolitik after finding some common
cause with President Putin on Friday over their mutual antipathy to US positions
on Iran and trade, notably over Russian gas sales to Germany.

Berlin has numerous complaints about Chinese behaviour but Mrs Merkel has
decided to emphasise common concerns in the face of Mr Trump's America First
policies.

In a her weekly video message Mrs Merkel said that discussions in China would
include important issues such as the rule of law and ensuring equal access to
each other's markets. Her two-day visit starting on Thursday will include talks
with President Xi and Li Keqiang, the prime minister.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              25 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

US-China trade war is put 'on hold'

BYLINE: Richard Lloyd Parry ; David Charter

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 444 words


The prospect of an American trade war with China was "on hold" last night after
Beijing agreed to buy more energy and farm goods.

Senior officials said that round-theclock talks in Washington had paved the way
for further negotiations on closing the $375 billion trade gap with China, long
the target of threatened tariffs by President Trump.

However, the United States failed to win a commitment from China to buy US goods
in sufficient quantities to narrow the trade gap by $200 billion by 2020.

The commitment to further talks was confirmed by Steven Mnuchin, the US Treasury
secretary, as Angela Merkel prepared to visit China this week as part of her own
push to co-ordinate moves against US protectionist threats.

The German chancellor also wants to work with China on salvaging the Iran
nuclear deal, worth billions to companies from both countries, after Mr Trump's
withdrawal and warnings of US sanctions against those continuing to trade with
Tehran.

Mr Mnuchin and Larry Kudlow, chief economic adviser to Mr Trump, said yesterday
that the US-China agreement had set up a framework for addressing trade
imbalances. "We are putting the trade war on hold," Mr Mnuchin told Fox News
Sunday. "Right now, we have agreed to put the tariffs on hold while we try to
execute the framework."

Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, plans to go to China soon to discuss
increased Chinese imports of US energy, including liquefied natural gas, and
agriculture and manufactured goods. Mr Mnuchin said that the US expected an
increase of between 35 per cent and 40 per cent in US agricultural exports to
China and a doubling of energy purchases over the next three to five years.

China argues - and many economists agree - that the trade balance between the
two economies depends less on trade policy than on national and international
trends in consumption and savings patterns, beyond the short-term control of
governments.

Nonetheless, in the face of insistent criticism by Mr Trump, Beijing has
proposed buying more cars, energy and farm products. It has also asked
Washington to remove a ban on sales to China of technology that is sold freely
to other countries.

In return, China has asked for an urgent reversal of devastating sanctions
imposed on ZTE, the technology company, for trading with Iran and North Korea, a
concession that Mr Trump has indicated he is willing to make.

Mrs Merkel is stepping up her pragmatic realpolitik after finding some common
cause with President Putin on Friday over their mutual antipathy to US positions
on Iran and trade, notably over Russian gas sales to Germany. Her two-day visit
starting on Thursday will include talks with President Xi.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              26 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 21, 2018 Monday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Trade war 'on hold' as China agrees talks

BYLINE: Richard Lloyd Parry; David Charter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 502 words


The prospect of an American trade war with China is "on hold" after Beijing
agreed to buy more energy and farm goods, senior US officials said yesterday.

Round-the-clock talks in Washington paved the way for further negotiations on
closing the $375 billion trade gap with China, long the target of threatened
tariffs by President Trump.

However, the US failed to win a commitment from China to buy US goods in
sufficient quantities to narrow the trade gap by $200 billion by 2020. The
commitment to further talks was con-firmed by Steven Mnuchin, the US Treasury
secretary, as Angela Merkel prepared to visit China this week as part of her own
push to co-ordinate moves against US protectionist threats.

The German chancellor also wants to work with China on salvaging the Iran
nuclear deal, worth billions to companies from both countries, after Mr Trump's
withdrawal and warnings of US sanctions against those continuing to trade with
Tehran.

Mr Mnuchin and Larry Kudlow, chief economic adviser to Mr Trump, said yesterday
that the US-China agreement set up a framework for addressing trade imbalances.
"We are putting the trade war on hold," Mr Mnuchin told Fox News Sunday. "Right
now, we have agreed to put the tariffs on hold while we try to execute the
framework."

Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, plans to go to China soon to discuss
increased Chinese imports of US energy, including liquefied natural gas, and
agriculture and manufactured goods. Mr Mnuchin said that the US expected an
increase of between 35 and 40 per cent in US agricultural exports to China and a
doubling of energy purchases over the next three to five years. China argues,
and many economists agree, that the trade balance between the two massive
economies depends less on trade policy than on national and international trends
in consumption and savings patterns, beyond the short-term control of
governments.

Nonetheless, in the face of insistent criticism by Mr Trump, Beijing has
proposed buying more cars, energy and farm products. It has also asked
Washington to remove a ban on sales to China of technology that is sold freely
to other countries.

In return China has asked for an urgent reversal of devastating sanctions
imposed on the giant technology company ZTE for trading with Iran and North
Korea, a concession Mr Trump has indicated he is willing to make.

Mrs Merkel is stepping up her pragmatic realpolitik after finding some common
cause with President Putin on Friday over their mutual antipathy to US positions
on Iran and trade, notably over Russian gas sales to Germany.

Berlin has numerous complaints about Chinese behaviour but Mrs Merkel has
decided to emphasise common concerns in the face of Mr Trump's America First
policies.

In a her weekly video message Mrs Merkel said that discussions in China would
include important issues such as the rule of law and ensuring equal access to
each other's markets. Her two-day visit starting on Thursday will include talks
with President Xi and Li Keqiang, the prime minister.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              27 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                        The Independent - Daily Edition

                              May 20, 2018 Sunday
                                 Second Edition

Inane, sycophantic, at times touching - the TV coverage was exactly as it should
be

BYLINE: CHRISTINE MANBY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 671 words


There can be no greater televisual challenge than covering a royal wedding,
where the logistics of a live outside broadcast meet layers of protocol. With
just six months to plan for Harry and Meghan, which channel managed best?

Let's start with the sets. The BBC chose a medley of blues seemingly based on
the home colours of the Indian football team. There were sofas from Ikea and
occasional tables straight from your nan's house. If the BBC was trying to show
licence payers they're not squandering on aesthetics, they succeeded.

ITV fared slightly better with handmade cushions in juxtaposition with a Noguchi
coffee table, no less. But Sky News won hands down with a full-on red, white and
blue theme complete with abstract Union Flag carpet.

The BBC coverage started well with a moving poem by George The Poet. Then we got
to the presenters. Dermot O'Leary's shirt looked horribly tight around the neck.
Perhaps that's why he spent the whole morning squirming, prompting
@Crawfordbyname to tweet "Dermot O'Leary do you have piles???"

Meanwhile, Kirsty Young seemed to have dressed for another event entirely in a
dark green frock best described as dour. Still, it picked up the green in the
kilt worn by an early BBC guest who, legs akimbo, threatened to show viewers he
was a true Scot before most of us had the prosecco out.

The BBC stuck Huw Edwards in an eyrie with more Ikea tat, where he did a mighty
job of filling dead air before the service began. Later he reflected on Bishop
Michael Curry's address with "forceful" understatement. "Certainly not the kind
of address to have been heard at a royal wedding for a while," said Huw.

Poor Kirsty never looked entirely comfortable, having to share the sofa with
Dermot, but she had some of the day's best lines. As Meghan's car left Cliveden,
Kirsty helpfully announced that the bride was "wearing a veil and not much more
than that". Later, while celeb spotting, "Oh there's my husband in the church???
and my children." More establishment than a Dimbleby.

ITV had its own insider in the shape of Tom Bradby, who got an actual invitation
to the ceremony, which was great because it meant he couldn't commentate.

Instead, ITV's coverage was fronted by Philip Schofield and Julie Etchingham,
who must surely be a contender for the People's Presenter. (Unlike Holly
Willoughby, who tried to pull focus from the lovely Julie by announcing that she
would be wearing her own wedding dress to watch the footage. Bad, Holly.)

Apparently, Schofield's day started with a trip through some horse manure. He
spent the rest of the morning talking about it, coming out with such classics as
"I can see that Victoria wanted to smile", of Victoria Beckham, and of George
Clooney "his silver suit matches his locks".

Sky News presented a formidable tag team in Anna Botting and Kay Burley. Botting
was dressed for the possibility of a sudden banking crisis in Angela Merkel
chic, while Burley wore white lace, like a mother-of-the-bride determined to
remind the congregation she was once beautiful too.

Botting held fort in the studio, while Burley mingled with the "commoners", at
one point using the word with something approaching relish to describe Meghan
herself. Meanwhile, Burley's handling of the younger people in the crowd was a
masterclass in why you should never work with children.

Burley reached peak-Partridge when she lifted nine-year-old Christobel over a
barrier so the cameras could get a better look at the little girl's dress. She
didn't lift Christobel back but complained, on camera, as she moved to the next
shot, "oof, she was a bit heavy for me".

All in all, the television coverage of the royal wedding was exactly as you
would expect it to be: inane and sycophantic. But at the same time, it was
occasionally touching, a feeling summed up by the sight of Julie Etchingham
jumping up to see Meghan's car and spontaneously waving as the bride passed by.

It was a beautiful moment in a surprisingly lovely morning's TV. Just like
Julie, you couldn't help getting carried away.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2018 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                              28 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Observer(London)

                        May 20, 2018 Sunday 12:03 AM GMT

Europe struggles to find united front over US president;
With Donald Trump's actions dominating the agenda, a charm offensive for Balkan
leaders did not go to plan

BYLINE: Daniel Boffey

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 677 words


It was a bit of a squeeze at the EU summit last week in Sofia's National Palace
of Culture, an imposing communist relic. Six prime ministers from the west
Balkan states and their entourages filled its vast hallways and stairwells,
between tetchy meetings with EU leaders and even tetchier media performances.

The western Balkans summit was supposed to be an EU charm offensive, designed to
capture the hearts of the leaders of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia,
Montenegro, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Kosovo. But the EU's
leaders were demonstrably distracted. From the start, Donald Trump had hijacked
this summit.

A leaders' dinner of meatballs and buffalo steak last Wednesday was supposed to
be dedicated to discussions about the EU's lethargic performance in digital
innovation. But Trump's recent moves to abandon the nuclear deal with Iran,
known as the joint comprehensive action plan of action, and to usher in a
transatlantic trade war, by refusing to exempt EU importers from punitive steel
and aluminium tariffs, dominated starter, main course and dessert.

Donald Tusk, president of the European council, said what many felt: the
"capricious assertiveness" of Trump's White House put it on a par with China and
Russia as a threat to European interests and security. "Looking at the latest
decisions of President Trump, some could think, with friends like that, who
needs enemies?", Tusk said.

Both Iran and a tariff war are challenges to EU sovereignty, Emmanuel Macron of
France told fellow leaders, requiring a unified response. "One thing is very
clear to me," said Günther Oettinger, the EU budget commissioner. "Trump
despises weaklings."

On trade, the EU thinks there might be a deal to be struck

But in truth, the EU is fractured about how it should respond to the threat of a
trade war and pretty much in despair about the fate of the Iran deal, struck in
2015, under which Tehran accepted strict limits on its nuclear programme in
return for an escape from the sanctions that had strangled its economy for more
than a decade. European companies are pulling out of Iran every day.
Notwithstanding the EU's vow to keep faith with the agreement, it becomes
increasingly unlikely that Tehran will conclude that the economic benefits
continue to make it worth their while.

On trade, however, the EU thinks there might be a deal to be struck. Trump wants
to force the EU to open up wider talks on how the bloc treats American products
in return for dropping steel and aluminium tariffs. In particular, he has vowed
that unless the EU opens up its markets, " we're going to tax Mercedes-Benz, and
we're going to tax BMW ".

In 2017, 1.3 million German vehicles were sold in the US, 10% of total
production, with revenues amounting to (EURO)29.4bn. Angela Merkel, the German
chancellor, wants and needs to talk trade.

Martin Selmayr, European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker's right-hand
man, has fashioned a holdable line, for now: there will be no talks unless there
is a permanent exemption for European businesses from the punitive tariffs.

There's a carrot for Trump. The EU is offering to increase natural gas imports
from the US, provide reciprocal access for industrial products and discuss World
Trade Organisation reform.

"From a Trumpian perspective that would be a win for the US and you could say it
would be a concession from the EU," said one senior EU diplomat. "The
Netherlands, France and Spain are against the strategy. For Berlin this is a
quick way out of a dilemma. For Paris it's: 'We have to think long-term about
where want to go with this administration and where we want to channel our
energy and resources.' [But] it's important to realise for all of us in the EU
that trade talks with this administration are obviously not going to be easy.

"A successful trade negotiation requires that both sides want to create a
win-win situation. I'm not sure this administration is keen on creating win-win
situations. It requires a pretty good sense of why we're doing this and what
we're going to get out of this."

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBONS


                   Copyright 2018 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              29 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                         The Sunday Telegraph (London)

                                  May 20, 2018
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Brexit has become a farce, risking an outcome that will satisfy no one

BYLINE: jeremy warner

SECTION: BUSINESS AND MONEY;FEATURES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 967 words


By far the best summary so far ventured of the Brexit negotiations came from the
Prime Minister of Luxembourg, Xavier Bettel. "They were in with a load of
opt-outs," he said. "Now they are out, and want a load of opt-ins." Indeed so;
we seem to be steadily opting back into virtually everything, the customs union
being just the latest example.

The situation is becoming almost laughable. It is as if Britain is attempting to
negotiate what it already has, only worse, because as things stand we at least
have some say over whatever nonsense comes out of Brussels, and are in a
position to veto the worst of it.

In Theresa May's efforts to reconcile the conflicting wants of the Leave and
Remain camps, she is taking us into a kind of no-man's land that is as
manifestly unsatisfactory to Remainers as it is the Brexiteers. Normally, I am
all in favour of compromise, but this is ridiculous. From the off, Britain's
negotiating stance has steadily transmogrified; no deal is better than a bad
deal, Mrs May said in her Lancaster House speech.

By Florence, this sound bite was notably absent, and it now seems that almost
any deal, however bad, is better than no deal.

It is game theory 101 that the moment you reveal your hand by indicating desire
for a deal, you are on the back foot, and the other side has the advantage. Our
present stance seems to be that unless you (the EU) offer us a satisfactory
deal, we'll ... we'll ... just jolly well be forced to stay in. Game over. I
exaggerate only a little.

As someone who supported Remain, I take no pleasure in the dog's Brexit we are
making of leaving, or in pointing out that some of us warned that this is where
we were likely to end up. Britain's problem is that it has become too enmeshed
in the European economy to make a no-deal Brexit a credible threat. The Irish
border issue adds another layer of complexity. If leaving the EU leads to the
break-up of the United Kingdom, that would not seem such a great outcome.

There is, of course, a more charitable explanation of what's going on - that it
is all part of a clever strategy that could end up winning a much better deal
than generally expected. Under this interpretation, Mrs May is able to point to
the more hardline members of her cabinet and party, and say to her EU
counterparts, just look who you will get if you do not cut me some slack. The
nutters would be in charge and you really will get no deal. Then you will be
sorry. It would be positively Machiavellian if this is indeed what she is up to.
But sorry to say, it is hard to credit her with that much cunning.

Mrs May could have circumvented many of her current difficulties by opting for
the Norwegian model right at the beginning. Membership of the European Economic
Area could easily have been framed as a staging post to a later and fuller
separation once the pros and cons had been more adequately assessed, and in the
meanwhile would have left our trading relationship with Europe substantially
untouched.

It would also have been a much more satisfactory transition than the one we are
now trying to negotiate. By interpreting Brexit as a vote for immigration
controls, she boxed herself in and is now likely to end up with the worst
imaginable form of Brexit - pinched, resentful and with even less sovereignty
than we have now.

High pressure economy For those clutching at straws, there was good news last
week from Britain's labour market statistics. More people are working in Britain
than ever before, and unemployment is at its lowest level in more than 40 years.
"We can be proud of our record on jobs," the Chancellor crowed.

Really? I suppose we could if they were all great jobs and we lived in a high
wage, high productivity economy. But actually it is the reverse. Too many people
subsist in low-paid, rubbish jobs that have to be topped up through the benefits
system to make them a viable form of living at all.

Many employers complain of chronic labour shortages and lobby for more work
permits to fill the gap. Yet, shamefully, they fail to invest in the higher
wages, productivity and training that might allow these positions to be filled
from the existing, increasingly impoverished workforce.

A recent article in The Atlantic Monthly drew attention to what Arthur Okun, the
American economist, once called "the high pressure economy", a state of affairs
where growth is high and unemployment low. This creates a virtuous cycle where
employers have little option but to invest in training low-skilled workers so
they can fill higher productivity, higher paid jobs.

Globalisation has, I fear, broken that link, allowing companies to augment the
workforce with low-skilled migrant workers that contribute to the converse - a
"low pressure economy".

I am going to get myself into a lot of trouble for saying this, for it runs
counter to much accepted economic thinking, but it may well be that Trump is on
to something by apparently deliberately trying to get the US economy to
overheat, while simultaneously attempting to limit the deflationary effects of
migration and international trade. If it forces US companies to invest in
training, productivity and higher pay, what is not to like? Funnily enough,
Singapore last week won high praise from the International Monetary Fund for the
success of its efforts to transition to a high productivity, innovation-based
growth model. Limiting unskilled migration has been a key element of the
strategy. I doubt this approach would win the IMF's stamp of approval almost
anywhere else. To the contrary, the standard script is that clamping down on
labour migration is economically compromising. But what if free movement is
actually part of the problem?

'I take no pleasure in the dog's Brexit we are making of leaving, or in pointing
out some of us warned we would end up here'

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Theresa May with Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel. The PM's efforts to
appease Remain and Leave camps have backfired

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STL


                  Copyright 2018 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              30 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                           The Sunday Times (London)

                              May 20, 2018 Sunday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Varadkar throws May customs union lifeline

BYLINE: Stephen O'Brien

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 496 words


Dublin is happy for the UK to remain within the EU customs union beyond the
Brexit transition period of 2019-21, as long as a legally binding backstop
agreement - no harder border between Northern Ireland and the Republic - is in
place for the extended withdrawal phase, government sources have signalled.

Leo Varadkar, the taoiseach, and Simon Coveney, the minister for foreign
affairs, believe Theresa May has made real progress at moving the hard
Brexiteers within her cabinet closer to accepting the need for the backstop.

The pair also believe the UK prime minister's assurance that she wants to avoid
a hard border with the Republic.

However, the government sources warn that the UK's extended transition plan will
have to include continued recognition of the European Court of Justice and the
four freedoms of the single market, including freedom of movement.

The sources say there must also be a continued contribution to the EU budget
beyond 2020, to avoid rejection by Michel Barnier, the EU's chief Brexit
negotiator.

"The two proposals that Britain has been talking about most recently, to be
honest with you, neither of them will work as they are currently being
proposed," a senior government figure said last week.

"Maximum facilitation - 'max fac' - is a nonstarter with its drones and camera
and border paraphernalia ... I think the British cabinet knows that, but they
are trying to create some time and space to put something in place that is going
to take a lot longer to figure out.

"That effectively means a proposal to stay in the customs union for a longer
period than the transition."

Another government source said the UK had made significant progress in narrowing
down its position, but there were "lots of holes" in its failure to address
compliance with the EU single market freedoms in an extended transition.

"Backdoor single market access will be shot down by Barnier, [Germany's Angela]
Merkel and [France's Emmanuel] Macron, regardless of what we think of it in
Dublin," one official said.

"If transition is extended, that is great for Irish business and gives huge
reassurance to British business. But it would just be a given for the rest of
the EU that the four freedoms would have to apply, the jurisdiction of the
European Court of Justice would have to apply, and some form of fresh budget
contribution would be required from Britain to the new multiannual financial
framework, which starts in January 1, 2021 - the day transition is supposed to
end."

After a bilateral meeting with May on the margins of an EU summit on Thursday,
Varadkar said: "[May] gave me an insight into some new thinking that the UK
government has in relation to customs, and obviously we'll see how that
develops. We haven't seen any detail of that yet. Certainly I think any move on
customs which brings the UK closer to the EU is to be welcomed, but I very much
emphasised that resolving the issue of a hard border requires more than
customs."

Dominic Lawson, Comment, page 22

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Varadkar is said to be happy that May has made progress on the border
issue

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STS


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              31 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                           The Sunday Times (London)

                              May 20, 2018 Sunday
                                   Edition 1;
                                Northern Ireland

Republic offers customs union lifeline to May

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 503 words


Dublin is happy for the UK to remain within the EU customs union beyond the
Brexit transition period of 2019-21, as long as a legally binding backstop
agreement - no harder border between Northern Ireland and the Republic - is in
place for the extended withdrawal phase, Irish government sources have
signalled, writes Stephen O'Brien.

Leo Varadkar, the taoiseach, and Simon Coveney, Ireland's minister for foreign
affairs, believe Theresa May has made real progress at moving the hard
Brexiteers within her cabinet closer to accepting the need for the backstop.

The pair also believe the prime minister's assurance that she wants to avoid a
hard border with the Republic.

However, the government sources warn that the UK's extended transition plan will
have to include continued recognition of the European Court of Justice and the
four freedoms of the single market, including freedom of movement.

The sources say there must also be a continued contribution to the EU budget
beyond 2020, to avoid rejection by Michel Barnier, the EU's chief Brexit
negotiator.

"The two proposals that Britain has been talking about most recently, to be
honest with you, neither of them will work as they are currently being
proposed," a senior government figure said last week.

"Maximum facilitation - 'max fac' - is a nonstarter with its drones and camera
and border paraphernalia ... I think the British cabinet knows that, but they
are trying to create some time and space to put something in place that is going
to take a lot longer to figure out.

"That effectively means a proposal to stay in the customs union for a longer
period than the transition."

Another government source said the UK had made significant progress in narrowing
down its position, but there were "lots of holes" in its failure to address
compliance with the EU single-market freedoms in an extended transition.

"Backdoor single market access will be shot down by Barnier, [Germany's Angela]
Merkel and [France's Emmanuel] Macron, regardless of what we think of it in
Dublin," said one official.

"If transition is extended, that is great for Irish business and gives huge
reassurance to British business. But it would just be a given for the rest of
the EU that the four freedoms would have to apply, the jurisdiction of the
European Court of Justice would have to apply, and some form of fresh budget
contribution would be required from Britain to the new multiannual financial
framework, which starts in January 1, 2021 - the day transition is meant to
end."

Following a bilateral meeting with May on the margins of an EU summit on
Thursday, Varadkar said: "The prime minister gave me an insight into some new
thinking that the UK government has in relation to customs, and obviously we'll
see how that develops. We haven't seen any detail of that yet. But certainly I
think any move on customs which brings the UK closer to the EU is to be
welcomed, but I very much emphasised that resolving the issue of a hard border
requires more than customs."

Dominic Lawson, page 26

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: STS


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              32 of 119 DOCUMENTS


                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday

RUSSIA DID NOT POISON SKRIPAL ... BECAUSE IF WE HAD HE'D BE DEAD

LENGTH: 472 words


AS EX-SPY LEAVES HOSPITAL, PUTIN'S GLOAT

BY SAM GREENHILL CHIEF REPORTER

Vladimir Putin yesterday greeted the news that former Russian spy Sergei Skripal
has been discharged from hospital by saying he would be dead if Moscow had been
behind the attack.

Mr Skripal, who nearly died from the nerve agent Novichok, was under armed guard
in an MI5 safehouse last night after two months of treatment.

Mr Putin was asked about the 66-year-old's discharge from Salisbury District
Hospital at a press conference with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Russia.

The president said: God grant him good health. If a military-grade poison had
been used, the man would have died on the spot.'

His comment was consistent with Russia's denial of any involvement in the
poisoning in Salisbury, Wiltshire, on March 4. In the immediate aftermath, Mr
Putin smirked when asked by reporters whether Russia was responsible. State
television added to the unease after it warned that traitors' should not settle
in Britain due to the risk of being killed.

Mr Skripal was jailed in Russia for 13 years in 2006 for passing on the
identities of Russian spies in Europe to the UK intelligence services. He was
part of a prisoner swap with the US in 2010

.

He and his daughter Yulia, 33, were found unconscious in Salisbury and were
admitted to hospital along with Detective Sergeant Nick Bailey after being
exposed to the nerve agent. Both Yulia, who was also left gravely ill, and the
officer were previously released.

It is unclear whether father and daughter have now been reunited, but they are
both under round-the-clock guard in secret locations. A source said: We don't
know whether he has even been in touch with his daughter Yulia since leaving
hospital.'

The hospital confirmed yesterday that all three patients had now been
discharged. Treatment of such patients involved stabilising them until their
bodies could produce more enzymes to replace those that had been poisoned', it
said in a statement.

Lorna Wilkinson, director of nursing, said: We have been able to discharge
Sergei Skripal. This is an important stage in his recovery, which will now take
place away from the hospital.'

The UK's Counter Terrorism Policing network is treating the poisoning of the
Skripals as attempted murder. The attack led to a huge decontamination operation
in Salisbury but only Mr Skripal's home remains cordoned off.

Britain blames Russia for the attack, with Prime Minister Theresa May describing
the incident as brazen' and despicable'.

Moscow is still demanding to see the Skripals and accuses the UK of violating
international law by not granting Russian officials access.

Its UK ambassador, Alexander Yakovenko, said yesterday: We want them to tell us
personally what they want. If they don't want our assistance, that's fine, but
we want to see them physically.'

© Daily Mail

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2018 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              33 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

EU risks Trump's ire by protecting European investments in Iran

BYLINE: James Crisp

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 507 words


BRUSSELS has moved to ban European companies from complying with US sanctions on
Iran and protect them from American court judgment, as relations between the
bloc and Donald Trump deteriorated further over Washington dumping the nuclear
deal.

The European Commission began the formal procedure to update its "blocking
statute", the most powerful response it can muster in response to Mr Trump,
after EU leaders backed the plan to protect member states' investments in Tehran
at a summit on Thursday. The move risks infuriating the unpredictable president
and could escalate a looming trade war with the US, which has threatened tariffs
on EU steel imports in a separate dispute.

Meanwhile, Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, will hold talks with Vladimir
Putin in the Black Sea resort of Sochi over the fate of the nuclear deal, which
is co-signed by Russia.

The statute will ban EU companies or people from observing the sanctions that Mr
Trump vowed will be reintroduced as he ditched the Iran nuclear deal. While it
will give protection to small and medium sized EU businesses active in Iran,
prospective investments by larger multinationals such as Airbus and Total remain
exposed to considerable risk.

Any US court punishment for ignoring the sanctions will be nullified on European
territory. EU companies will be able to claim damages against any harm caused to
them by, for example, pulling out of a deal because of Washington's actions.

Sources said that, theoretically, the president's plane Air Force One could be
impounded as part of a claim for damages if it landed on EU soil. In practice,
given that damages are decided at national level, that is highly unlikely.

In one possible scenario, a multinational company could face legal action in the
US if they ignored the sanctions - and punishment in the EU if they complied
with them.

There are ongoing talks with national governments about one-off bank transfers
to the Central Bank of Iran to protect the country's oil revenues. Negotiations
are expected on paying for oil in euros rather than dollars to get around the
sanctions. The commission said it would step up public support for EU companies
in Iran through the European Investment Bank and bolster cooperation in sectors
such as energy.

The announcement was intended to bolster the confidence of smaller businesses
active in Iran and signal the EU's support for the Iran nuclear deal, which
gradually lifts sanctions in return for the country's denuclearisation. 96per
cent of Iran's economy is based on small to mid-ranking businesses, and similar
sized companies from Germany, Italy, Austria, Sweden and Denmark have invested
there since the deal was signed in 2015.

EU sources said that last year Iranian exports to the EU were worth about
(EURO)11billion and imports were roughly the same. Since the nuclear deal was
signed, trade between the EU and Iran has increased.

The blocking statute has never been used, but the threat of its use forced
Washington to back down over sanctions on EU companies trading with Cuba in
1996.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2018 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              34 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

Merkel allies label US call for rise in defence budget 'cynical';
Germany

BYLINE: TOBIAS BUCK

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 443 words


German politicians yesterday denounced US president Donald Trump's latest attack
on the country's defence spending, as senior members of Chancellor Angela
Merkel's party described his intervention as "cynical" and "unacceptable".

Mr Trump has long urged Germany to spend 2 per cent of its gross domestic
product on defence, in line with a commitment made by Nato countries at a summit
in Wales in 2014.

In Washington on Thursday, Mr Trump once again singled out Berlin for criticism.

"Germany must demonstrate leadership in the alliance by addressing its
longstanding shortfall in defence contributions," he said.

"Germany has not contributed what it should be contributing, and it's a very big
beneficiary - far bigger than the United States, frankly."

The US president hailed Poland, Romania, Greece, the Baltic countries and the
UK, which he described as "right up to snuff" for meeting the 2 per cent target.

But he issued a blunt warning to Nato countries that fell short of their
spending commitment: "They'll be dealt with," Mr Trump said.

Germany spent (EURO)37bn, or 1.2 per cent of GDP, on defence last year - far
below most other Nato countries.

Yesterday senior members of Ms Merkel's Christian Democratic Union rejected Mr
Trump's latest criticism.

"It is not acceptable to point the finger at Germany, which is bearing the main
burden of the refugee reception in all of Europe," said Roderich Kiesewetter, a
CDU member of parliament.

"That is cynical because two of the reasons [for the refugee crisis] are the
vacuum left by the US in the Middle East and the failed US intervention policy
in Iraq. Trump himself admitted this during the election campaign."

Ms Merkel and Ursula von der Leyen, her defence minister, have signalled
repeatedly that the defence budget will rise in the years ahead, although not to
2 per cent of GDP.

In a speech to senior military officials in Berlin earlier this week, Ms von der
Leyen promised to increase defence spending to 1.5 per cent of GDP by 2025.

"We want to remain a dependable partner in our alliances," she said.

Jürgen Hardt, another CDU member of parliament, said: "Germany stands fully
behind the Nato commitments made in Wales in 2014.

"We provide an important contribution to the security of the alliance on the
border of eastern Europe and to the stabilisation of crises in multiple foreign
missions. We do more than many others in terms of civil crisis prevention and
humanitarian aid."

He added: "We will raise our defence expenditure steadily as agreed and approach
the 2 per cent mark by 2024. With Germany's economy growing steadily, the key
thing is the increase in our defence budget in absolute terms."

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Skills on show: German troops during a ceremony in Saxony last summer.
Germany spent (EURO)37bn, or 1.2 per cent of GDP, on defence last year, a figure
Donald Trump criticisedFilip Singer/EPA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              35 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

Germany and France court Putin over Iran nuclear pact;
Merkel and Macron seek to keep strategic ties with Moscow as Washington quits
deal

BYLINE: GUY CHAZAN;KATHRIN HILLE ;ANNE-SYLVAINE CHASSANY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 932 words


For Vladimir Putin it is a moment to savour: two of Europe's most powerful
politicians beating a path to his door.

Yesterday, Chancellor Angela Merkel met the Russian president in the Black Sea
resort of Sochi to make clear that Germany had a "strategic interest" in
maintaining good relations with Moscow. Next week, President Emmanuel Macron of
France will be in St Petersburg, a guest of Russia's most important annual
economic forum.

"Even in the most difficult times, we never broke off contact with each other,"
Mr Putin said after meeting Ms Merkel, whom he earlier presented with a bouquet
of roses. "Life goes on, develops, new opportunities arise."

Russia's diplomatic standing has in recent months been at rock bottom. But the
visits show that it could be dragged upwards from the depths by Donald Trump's
decision to quit the international nuclear agreement with Iran and impose new
sanctions on Tehran.

At odds over Syria, Ukraine and Moscow's meddling in the US election, Germany
and Russia find themselves in the unusual position of having a number of shared
interests. They both want to keep the Iran deal alive, and are resisting US
pressure over Nord Stream 2, the planned gas pipeline between Russia and Europe.

Asked after yesterday's meeting if a thaw was under way between Berlin and
Moscow, Ms Merkel said: "I consider it absolutely important for us to talk to
each other."

French officials said Mr Macron, during his visit to Russia next week, would
seek to underscore the new convergence with Moscow. "We have a collective
interest in staying in the [Iran] deal," an Elysée aide said. "One common
concern that brings us together is a willingness to avoid escalation in the
region," another aide noted.

Putin is clearly relishing the opportunity to show he is a more dependable
partner than Mr Trump, who has shown disregard for traditional alliances. "Putin
feels himself to be the temporary winner in this new situation," said Norbert
Röttgen, chairman of the Bundestag's foreign affairs committee. "He can't quite
believe his luck."

A focus of yesterday's meeting was the future of Nord Stream 2, which is opposed
by the Trump administration. It believes the pipeline, which runs under the
Baltic Sea, bypassing Ukraine, will deprive Kiev of critical transit fees and
make Europe more dependent on Russian energy exports. Mr Trump hit out at
Germany this week for "buying massive amounts of gas from Russia".

Ms Merkel had sought assurances from Mr Putin that Russia would continue to send
gas through the Ukrainian pipeline system even after Nord Stream 2 comes on
line, thus addressing some of the US concerns over the project.

Mr Putin told reporters after the meeting that Russia was ready to do so,
providing such shipments "make economic sense".

France is also hoping that Mr Macron's trip to Russia next week will herald a
thaw in the relationship. The president will meet Mr Putin for three hours in St
Petersburg next Thursday and the following day take part in a panel at the
city's annual International Economic Forum. He will be keen to "show we hold
firm positions [on contentious issues such as Syria] but also seek to deepen the
relationship everywhere we can", a senior diplomat said. Yet signs of a
rapprochement between Russia on the one hand and France and Germany on the other
pale into insignificance when set against their remaining disagreements. Paris
and Berlin have repeatedly condemned Russia's support for Bashar al-Assad in
Syria and its military interference in eastern Ukraine. They also joined the UK
in expelling Russian diplomats in March over the nerve agent poisoning of former
Soviet agent Sergei Skripal.

Anton Khlopkov, an analyst at the Centre for Energy and Security Studies, said
he was sceptical that Europe and Russia would be able to work together to
salvage the Iran deal, known as the JCPOA.

"The Europeans are too focused on the idea that Russia wants to undermine their
relaalso tionship with the US, and less focused on saving the JCPOA," he said.

Russian politicians agree. Grigory Yavlinsky, a veteran liberal politician, said
any talk of a thaw in relations between Europe and Russia was "wishful
thinking".

Mr Yavlinsky, who was one of the token challenger candidates who ran against Mr
Putin in the March presidential election, said the "first root cause" of the
chill between Moscow and western capitals was Russia's policy in Ukraine.

Relations would only improve if Russia agreed to discuss the status of Crimea,
which it annexed in 2014, pull out of eastern Ukraine and abandon his attempts
to compromise Ukraine's sovereignty. "But I don't see any signs [of that]," he
said.

Indeed, Mr Putin's most high-profile public appearance in weeks suggested that
he has no intention of backing down. On Thursday, he opened a bridge linking
Crimea with mainland Russia, a pet project built by a company controlled by his
billionaire friend, Arkady Rotenberg.

Although Mr Putin mainly touted the economic benefits the bridge would bring,
underlining the Kremlin's focus on improving people's livelihoods, his
appearance was condemned by several western governments.

Back in Sochi, Ms Merkel rejected the suggestion that more cordial relations
with Mr Putin were a sign that she was turning away from the US.

"We have a strong transatlantic friendship," she said. Through its history there
had been disputes and differences of opinion. "But this does not call into
question the intensity of that transatlantic relationship," she said.

'Putin feels himself to be the temporary winner in this new situation. He can't
quite believe his luck'

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: High-profile visit: Vladimir Putin welcomes Angela Merkel to talks in
the Black Sea resort of Sochi yesterday. Below, Emmanuel Macron - Kirill
Kudryavtsev /AFP/Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              36 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

Putin says it with flowers to Merkel

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 99 words


Vladimir Putin greets Angela Merkel with a bouquet at his residence in Sochi
yesterday. The Russian and German leaders' meeting, which precedes a visit to St
Petersburg next week by Emmanuel Macron, France's president, represents a
thawing of relations between Moscow and Berlin.

Despite their differences over Syria and Ukraine, Germany and Russia find
themselves in the unusual position of having a number of shared interests. They
both want to keep the Iran nuclear deal alive and are resisting US pressure over
Nord Stream 2, the planned gas pipeline between Russia and Europe. Analysis page
3

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EPA/Michael Klimentyev

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              37 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

Merkel allies label US call for rise in defence budget 'cynical'

BYLINE: TOBIAS BUCK

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 443 words


German politicians yesterday denounced US president Donald Trump's latest attack
on the country's defence spending, as senior members of Chancellor Angela
Merkel's party described his intervention as "cynical" and "unacceptable".

Mr Trump has long urged Germany to spend 2 per cent of its gross domestic
product on defence, in line with a commitment made by Nato countries at a summit
in Wales in 2014.

In Washington on Thursday, Mr Trump once again singled out Berlin for criticism.

"Germany must demonstrate leadership in the alliance by addressing its
longstanding shortfall in defence contributions," he said.

"Germany has not contributed what it should be contributing, and it's a very big
beneficiary - far bigger than the United States, frankly."

The US president hailed Poland, Romania, Greece, the Baltic countries and the
UK, which he described as "right up to snuff" for meeting the 2 per cent target.

But he issued a blunt warning to Nato countries that fell short of their
spending commitment: "They'll be dealt with," Mr Trump said.

Germany spent (EURO)37bn, or 1.2 per cent of GDP, on defence last year - far
below most other Nato countries.

Yesterday senior members of Ms Merkel's Christian Democratic Union rejected Mr
Trump's latest criticism.

"It is not acceptable to point the finger at Germany, which is bearing the main
burden of the refugee reception in all of Europe," said Roderich Kiesewetter, a
CDU member of parliament.

"That is cynical because two of the reasons [for the refugee crisis] are the
vacuum left by the US in the Middle East and the failed US intervention policy
in Iraq. Trump himself admitted this during the election campaign."

Ms Merkel and Ursula von der Leyen, her defence minister, have signalled
repeatedly that the defence budget will rise in the years ahead, although not to
2 per cent of GDP.

In a speech to senior military officials in Berlin earlier this week, Ms von der
Leyen promised to increase defence spending to 1.5 per cent of GDP by 2025.

"We want to remain a dependable partner in our alliances," she said.

Jürgen Hardt, another CDU member of parliament, said: "Germany stands fully
behind the Nato commitments made in Wales in 2014.

"We provide an important contribution to the security of the alliance on the
border of eastern Europe and to the stabilisation of crises in multiple foreign
missions. We do more than many others in terms of civil crisis prevention and
humanitarian aid."

He added: "We will raise our defence expenditure steadily as agreed and approach
the 2 per cent mark by 2024. With Germany's economy growing steadily, the key
thing is the increase in our defence budget in absolute terms."

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Skills on show: German troops during a ceremony in Saxony last summer.
Germany spent (EURO)37bn, or 1.2 per cent of GDP, on defence last year, a figure
Donald Trump criticised Filip Singer/EPA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              38 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

Germany and France court Putin over Iran nuclear pact;
Merkel and Macron seek to keep strategic ties with Moscow as Washington quits
deal

BYLINE: GUY CHAZAN ;KATHRIN HILLE ;ANNE-SYLVAINE CHASSANY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 932 words


For Vladimir Putin it is a moment to savour: two of Europe's most powerful
politicians beating a path to his door.

Yesterday, Chancellor Angela Merkel met the Russian president in the Black Sea
resort of Sochi to make clear that Germany had a "strategic interest" in
maintaining good relations with Moscow. Next week, President Emmanuel Macron of
France will be in St Petersburg, a guest of Russia's most important annual
economic forum.

"Even in the most difficult times, we never broke off contact with each other,"
Mr Putin said after meeting Ms Merkel, whom he earlier presented with a bouquet
of roses. "Life goes on, develops, new opportunities arise."

Russia's diplomatic standing has in recent months been at rock bottom. But the
visits show that it could be dragged upwards from the depths by Donald Trump's
decision to quit the international nuclear agreement with Iran and impose new
sanctions on Tehran.

At odds over Syria, Ukraine and Moscow's meddling in the US election, Germany
and Russia find themselves in the unusual position of having a number of shared
interests. They both want to keep the Iran deal alive, and are resisting US
pressure over Nord Stream 2, the planned gas pipeline between Russia and Europe.

Asked after yesterday's meeting if a thaw was under way between Berlin and
Moscow, Ms Merkel said: "I consider it absolutely important for us to talk to
each other."

French officials said Mr Macron, during his visit to Russia next week, would
seek to underscore the new convergence with Moscow. "We have a collective
interest in staying in the [Iran] deal," an Elysée aide said. "One common
concern that brings us together is a willingness to avoid escalation in the
region," another aide noted.

Putin is clearly relishing the opportunity to show he is a more dependable
partner than Mr Trump, who has shown disregard for traditional alliances. "Putin
feels himself to be the temporary winner in this new situation," said Norbert
Röttgen, chairman of the Bundestag's foreign affairs committee. "He can't quite
believe his luck."

A focus of yesterday's meeting was the future of Nord Stream 2, which is opposed
by the Trump administration. It believes the pipeline, which runs under the
Baltic Sea, bypassing Ukraine, will deprive Kiev of critical transit fees and
make Europe more dependent on Russian energy exports. Mr Trump hit out at
Germany this week for "buying massive amounts of gas from Russia".

Ms Merkel had sought assurances from Mr Putin that Russia would continue to send
gas through the Ukrainian pipeline system even after Nord Stream 2 comes on
line, thus addressing some of the US concerns over the project.

Mr Putin told reporters after the meeting that Russia was ready to do so,
providing such shipments "make economic sense".

France is also hoping that Mr Macron's trip to Russia next week will herald a
thaw in the relationship. The president will meet Mr Putin for three hours in St
Petersburg next Thursday and the following day take part in a panel at the
city's annual International Economic Forum. He will be keen to "show we hold
firm positions [on contentious issues such as Syria] but also seek to deepen the
relationship everywhere we can", a senior diplomat said. Yet signs of a
rapprochement between Russia on the one hand and France and Germany on the other
pale into insignificance when set against their remaining disagreements. Paris
and Berlin have repeatedly condemned Russia's support for Bashar al-Assad in
Syria and its military interference in eastern Ukraine. They also joined the UK
in expelling Russian diplomats in March over the nerve agent poisoning of former
Soviet agent Sergei Skripal.

Anton Khlopkov, an analyst at the Centre for Energy and Security Studies, said
he was sceptical that Europe and Russia would be able to work together to
salvage the Iran deal, known as the JCPOA.

"The Europeans are too focused on the idea that Russia wants to undermine their
relaalso tionship with the US, and less focused on saving the JCPOA," he said.

Russian politicians agree. Grigory Yavlinsky, a veteran liberal politician, said
any talk of a thaw in relations between Europe and Russia was "wishful
thinking".

Mr Yavlinsky, who was one of the token challenger candidates who ran against Mr
Putin in the March presidential election, said the "first root cause" of the
chill between Moscow and western capitals was Russia's policy in Ukraine.

Relations would only improve if Russia agreed to discuss the status of Crimea,
which it annexed in 2014, pull out of eastern Ukraine and abandon his attempts
to compromise Ukraine's sovereignty. "But I don't see any signs [of that]," he
said.

Indeed, Mr Putin's most high-profile public appearance in weeks suggested that
he has no intention of backing down. On Thursday, he opened a bridge linking
Crimea with mainland Russia, a pet project built by a company controlled by his
billionaire friend, Arkady Rotenberg.

Although Mr Putin mainly touted the economic benefits the bridge would bring,
underlining the Kremlin's focus on improving people's livelihoods, his
appearance was condemned by several western governments.

Back in Sochi, Ms Merkel rejected the suggestion that more cordial relations
with Mr Putin were a sign that she was turning away from the US.

"We have a strong transatlantic friendship," she said. Through its history there
had been disputes and differences of opinion. "But this does not call into
question the intensity of that transatlantic relationship," she said.

'Putin feels himself to be the temporary winner in this new situation. He can't
quite believe his luck'

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: High-profile visit: Vladimir Putin welcomes Angela Merkel to talks in
the Black Sea resort of Sochi yesterday. Below, Emmanuel Macron - Kirill
Kudryavtsev /AFP/Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              39 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

Putin says it with flowers to Merkel

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 99 words


Vladimir Putin greets Angela Merkel with a bouquet at his residence in Sochi
yesterday. The Russian and German leaders' meeting, which precedes a visit to St
Petersburg next week by Emmanuel Macron, France's president, represents a
thawing of relations between Moscow and Berlin.

Despite their differences over Syria and Ukraine, Germany and Russia find
themselves in the unusual position of having a number of shared interests. They
both want to keep the Iran nuclear deal alive and are resisting US pressure over
Nord Stream 2, the planned gas pipeline between Russia and Europe. Analysis page
3

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EPA/Michael Klimentyev

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              40 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                              Middle East Edition

Putin says it with flowers to Merkel

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 99 words


Vladimir Putin greets Angela Merkel with a bouquet at his residence in Sochi
yesterday. The Russian and German leaders' meeting, which precedes a visit to St
Petersburg next week by Emmanuel Macron, France's president, represents a
thawing of relations between Moscow and Berlin.

Despite their differences over Syria and Ukraine, Germany and Russia find
themselves in the unusual position of having a number of shared interests. They
both want to keep the Iran nuclear deal alive and are resisting US pressure over
Nord Stream 2, the planned gas pipeline between Russia and Europe. Analysis page
3

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EPA/Michael Klimentyev

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              41 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Merkel allies label US call for rise in defence budget 'cynical';
Germany

BYLINE: TOBIAS BUCK

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 443 words


German politicians yesterday denounced US president Donald Trump's latest attack
on the country's defence spending, as senior members of Chancellor Angela
Merkel's party described his intervention as "cynical" and "unacceptable".

Mr Trump has long urged Germany to spend 2 per cent of its gross domestic
product on defence, in line with a commitment made by Nato countries at a summit
in Wales in 2014.

In Washington on Thursday, Mr Trump once again singled out Berlin for criticism.

"Germany must demonstrate leadership in the alliance by addressing its
longstanding shortfall in defence contributions," he said.

"Germany has not contributed what it should be contributing, and it's a very big
beneficiary - far bigger than the United States, frankly."

The US president hailed Poland, Romania, Greece, the Baltic countries and the
UK, which he described as "right up to snuff" for meeting the 2 per cent target.

But he issued a blunt warning to Nato countries that fell short of their
spending commitment: "They'll be dealt with," Mr Trump said.

Germany spent (EURO)37bn, or 1.2 per cent of GDP, on defence last year - far
below most other Nato countries.

Yesterday senior members of Ms Merkel's Christian Democratic Union rejected Mr
Trump's latest criticism.

"It is not acceptable to point the finger at Germany, which is bearing the main
burden of the refugee reception in all of Europe," said Roderich Kiesewetter, a
CDU member of parliament.

"That is cynical because two of the reasons [for the refugee crisis] are the
vacuum left by the US in the Middle East and the failed US intervention policy
in Iraq. Trump himself admitted this during the election campaign."

Ms Merkel and Ursula von der Leyen, her defence minister, have signalled
repeatedly that the defence budget will rise in the years ahead, although not to
2 per cent of GDP.

In a speech to senior military officials in Berlin earlier this week, Ms von der
Leyen promised to increase defence spending to 1.5 per cent of GDP by 2025.

"We want to remain a dependable partner in our alliances," she said.

Jürgen Hardt, another CDU member of parliament, said: "Germany stands fully
behind the Nato commitments made in Wales in 2014.

"We provide an important contribution to the security of the alliance on the
border of eastern Europe and to the stabilisation of crises in multiple foreign
missions. We do more than many others in terms of civil crisis prevention and
humanitarian aid."

He added: "We will raise our defence expenditure steadily as agreed and approach
the 2 per cent mark by 2024. With Germany's economy growing steadily, the key
thing is the increase in our defence budget in absolute terms."

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Skills on show: German troops during a ceremony in Saxony last summer.
Germany spent (EURO)37bn, or 1.2 per cent of GDP, on defence last year, a figure
Donald Trump criticisedFilip Singer/EPA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              42 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Germany and France court Putin over Iran nuclear pact;
Merkel and Macron seek to keep strategic ties with Moscow as Washington quits
deal

BYLINE: GUY CHAZAN ;KATHRIN HILLE ;ANNE-SYLVAINE CHASSANY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 932 words


For Vladimir Putin it is a moment to savour: two of Europe's most powerful
politicians beating a path to his door.

Yesterday, Chancellor Angela Merkel met the Russian president in the Black Sea
resort of Sochi to make clear that Germany had a "strategic interest" in
maintaining good relations with Moscow. Next week, President Emmanuel Macron of
France will be in St Petersburg, a guest of Russia's most important annual
economic forum.

"Even in the most difficult times, we never broke off contact with each other,"
Mr Putin said after meeting Ms Merkel, whom he earlier presented with a bouquet
of roses. "Life goes on, develops, new opportunities arise."

Russia's diplomatic standing has in recent months been at rock bottom. But the
visits show that it could be dragged upwards from the depths by Donald Trump's
decision to quit the international nuclear agreement with Iran and impose new
sanctions on Tehran.

At odds over Syria, Ukraine and Moscow's meddling in the US election, Germany
and Russia find themselves in the unusual position of having a number of shared
interests. They both want to keep the Iran deal alive, and are resisting US
pressure over Nord Stream 2, the planned gas pipeline between Russia and Europe.

Asked after yesterday's meeting if a thaw was under way between Berlin and
Moscow, Ms Merkel said: "I consider it absolutely important for us to talk to
each other."

French officials said Mr Macron, during his visit to Russia next week, would
seek to underscore the new convergence with Moscow. "We have a collective
interest in staying in the [Iran] deal," an Elysée aide said. "One common
concern that brings us together is a willingness to avoid escalation in the
region," another aide noted.

Putin is clearly relishing the opportunity to show he is a more dependable
partner than Mr Trump, who has shown disregard for traditional alliances. "Putin
feels himself to be the temporary winner in this new situation," said Norbert
Röttgen, chairman of the Bundestag's foreign affairs committee. "He can't quite
believe his luck."

A focus of yesterday's meeting was the future of Nord Stream 2, which is opposed
by the Trump administration. It believes the pipeline, which runs under the
Baltic Sea, bypassing Ukraine, will deprive Kiev of critical transit fees and
make Europe more dependent on Russian energy exports. Mr Trump hit out at
Germany this week for "buying massive amounts of gas from Russia".

Ms Merkel had sought assurances from Mr Putin that Russia would continue to send
gas through the Ukrainian pipeline system even after Nord Stream 2 comes on
line, thus addressing some of the US concerns over the project.

Mr Putin told reporters after the meeting that Russia was ready to do so,
providing such shipments "make economic sense".

France is also hoping that Mr Macron's trip to Russia next week will herald a
thaw in the relationship. The president will meet Mr Putin for three hours in St
Petersburg next Thursday and the following day take part in a panel at the
city's annual International Economic Forum. He will be keen to "show we hold
firm positions [on contentious issues such as Syria] but also seek to deepen the
relationship everywhere we can", a senior diplomat said. Yet signs of a
rapprochement between Russia on the one hand and France and Germany on the other
pale into insignificance when set against their remaining disagreements. Paris
and Berlin have repeatedly condemned Russia's support for Bashar al-Assad in
Syria and its military interference in eastern Ukraine. They also joined the UK
in expelling Russian diplomats in March over the nerve agent poisoning of former
Soviet agent Sergei Skripal.

Anton Khlopkov, an analyst at the Centre for Energy and Security Studies, said
he was sceptical that Europe and Russia would be able to work together to
salvage the Iran deal, known as the JCPOA.

"The Europeans are too focused on the idea that Russia wants to undermine their
relaalso tionship with the US, and less focused on saving the JCPOA," he said.

Russian politicians agree. Grigory Yavlinsky, a veteran liberal politician, said
any talk of a thaw in relations between Europe and Russia was "wishful
thinking".

Mr Yavlinsky, who was one of the token challenger candidates who ran against Mr
Putin in the March presidential election, said the "first root cause" of the
chill between Moscow and western capitals was Russia's policy in Ukraine.

Relations would only improve if Russia agreed to discuss the status of Crimea,
which it annexed in 2014, pull out of eastern Ukraine and abandon his attempts
to compromise Ukraine's sovereignty. "But I don't see any signs [of that]," he
said.

Indeed, Mr Putin's most high-profile public appearance in weeks suggested that
he has no intention of backing down. On Thursday, he opened a bridge linking
Crimea with mainland Russia, a pet project built by a company controlled by his
billionaire friend, Arkady Rotenberg.

Although Mr Putin mainly touted the economic benefits the bridge would bring,
underlining the Kremlin's focus on improving people's livelihoods, his
appearance was condemned by several western governments.

Back in Sochi, Ms Merkel rejected the suggestion that more cordial relations
with Mr Putin were a sign that she was turning away from the US.

"We have a strong transatlantic friendship," she said. Through its history there
had been disputes and differences of opinion. "But this does not call into
question the intensity of that transatlantic relationship," she said.

'Putin feels himself to be the temporary winner in this new situation. He can't
quite believe his luck'

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: High-profile visit: Vladimir Putin welcomes Angela Merkel to talks in
the Black Sea resort of Sochi yesterday. Below, Emmanuel Macron - Kirill
Kudryavtsev /AFP/Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              43 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

Putin says it with flowers to Merkel

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; TEASERS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 99 words


Vladimir Putin greets Angela Merkel with a bouquet at his residence in Sochi
yesterday. The Russian and German leaders' meeting, which precedes a visit to St
Petersburg next week by Emmanuel Macron, France's president, represents a
thawing of relations between Moscow and Berlin.

Despite their differences over Syria and Ukraine, Germany and Russia find
themselves in the unusual position of having a number of shared interests. They
both want to keep the Iran nuclear deal alive and are resisting US pressure over
Nord Stream 2, the planned gas pipeline between Russia and Europe. Analysis page
3

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: EPA/Michael Klimentyev

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              44 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

Merkel allies label US call for rise in defence budget 'cynical';
Germany

BYLINE: TOBIAS BUCK

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 443 words


German politicians yesterday denounced US president Donald Trump's latest attack
on the country's defence spending, as senior members of Chancellor Angela
Merkel's party described his intervention as "cynical" and "unacceptable".

Mr Trump has long urged Germany to spend 2 per cent of its gross domestic
product on defence, in line with a commitment made by Nato countries at a summit
in Wales in 2014.

In Washington on Thursday, Mr Trump once again singled out Berlin for criticism.

"Germany must demonstrate leadership in the alliance by addressing its
longstanding shortfall in defence contributions," he said.

"Germany has not contributed what it should be contributing, and it's a very big
beneficiary - far bigger than the United States, frankly."

The US president hailed Poland, Romania, Greece, the Baltic countries and the
UK, which he described as "right up to snuff" for meeting the 2 per cent target.

But he issued a blunt warning to Nato countries that fell short of their
spending commitment: "They'll be dealt with," Mr Trump said.

Germany spent (EURO)37bn, or 1.2 per cent of GDP, on defence last year - far
below most other Nato countries.

Yesterday senior members of Ms Merkel's Christian Democratic Union rejected Mr
Trump's latest criticism.

"It is not acceptable to point the finger at Germany, which is bearing the main
burden of the refugee reception in all of Europe," said Roderich Kiesewetter, a
CDU member of parliament.

"That is cynical because two of the reasons [for the refugee crisis] are the
vacuum left by the US in the Middle East and the failed US intervention policy
in Iraq. Trump himself admitted this during the election campaign."

Ms Merkel and Ursula von der Leyen, her defence minister, have signalled
repeatedly that the defence budget will rise in the years ahead, although not to
2 per cent of GDP.

In a speech to senior military officials in Berlin earlier this week, Ms von der
Leyen promised to increase defence spending to 1.5 per cent of GDP by 2025.

"We want to remain a dependable partner in our alliances," she said.

Jürgen Hardt, another CDU member of parliament, said: "Germany stands fully
behind the Nato commitments made in Wales in 2014.

"We provide an important contribution to the security of the alliance on the
border of eastern Europe and to the stabilisation of crises in multiple foreign
missions. We do more than many others in terms of civil crisis prevention and
humanitarian aid."

He added: "We will raise our defence expenditure steadily as agreed and approach
the 2 per cent mark by 2024. With Germany's economy growing steadily, the key
thing is the increase in our defence budget in absolute terms."

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Skills on show: German troops during a ceremony in Saxony last summer.
Germany spent (EURO)37bn, or 1.2 per cent of GDP, on defence last year, a figure
Donald Trump criticisedFilip Singer/EPA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              45 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

Germany and France court Putin over Iran nuclear pact;
Merkel and Macron seek to keep strategic ties with Moscow as Washington quits
deal

BYLINE: GUY CHAZAN;KATHRIN HILLE;ANNE-SYLVAINE CHASSANY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 932 words


For Vladimir Putin it is a moment to savour: two of Europe's most powerful
politicians beating a path to his door.

Yesterday, Chancellor Angela Merkel met the Russian president in the Black Sea
resort of Sochi to make clear that Germany had a "strategic interest" in
maintaining good relations with Moscow. Next week, President Emmanuel Macron of
France will be in St Petersburg, a guest of Russia's most important annual
economic forum.

"Even in the most difficult times, we never broke off contact with each other,"
Mr Putin said after meeting Ms Merkel, whom he earlier presented with a bouquet
of roses. "Life goes on, develops, new opportunities arise."

Russia's diplomatic standing has in recent months been at rock bottom. But the
visits show that it could be dragged upwards from the depths by Donald Trump's
decision to quit the international nuclear agreement with Iran and impose new
sanctions on Tehran.

At odds over Syria, Ukraine and Moscow's meddling in the US election, Germany
and Russia find themselves in the unusual position of having a number of shared
interests. They both want to keep the Iran deal alive, and are resisting US
pressure over Nord Stream 2, the planned gas pipeline between Russia and Europe.

Asked after yesterday's meeting if a thaw was under way between Berlin and
Moscow, Ms Merkel said: "I consider it absolutely important for us to talk to
each other."

French officials said Mr Macron, during his visit to Russia next week, would
seek to underscore the new convergence with Moscow. "We have a collective
interest in staying in the [Iran] deal," an Elysée aide said. "One common
concern that brings us together is a willingness to avoid escalation in the
region," another aide noted.

Putin is clearly relishing the opportunity to show he is a more dependable
partner than Mr Trump, who has shown disregard for traditional alliances. "Putin
feels himself to be the temporary winner in this new situation," said Norbert
Röttgen, chairman of the Bundestag's foreign affairs committee. "He can't quite
believe his luck."

A focus of yesterday's meeting was the future of Nord Stream 2, which is opposed
by the Trump administration. It believes the pipeline, which runs under the
Baltic Sea, bypassing Ukraine, will deprive Kiev of critical transit fees and
make Europe more dependent on Russian energy exports. Mr Trump hit out at
Germany this week for "buying massive amounts of gas from Russia".

Ms Merkel had sought assurances from Mr Putin that Russia would continue to send
gas through the Ukrainian pipeline system even after Nord Stream 2 comes on
line, thus addressing some of the US concerns over the project.

Mr Putin told reporters after the meeting that Russia was ready to do so,
providing such shipments "make economic sense".

France is also hoping that Mr Macron's trip to Russia next week will herald a
thaw in the relationship. The president will meet Mr Putin for three hours in St
Petersburg next Thursday and the following day take part in a panel at the
city's annual International Economic Forum. He will be keen to "show we hold
firm positions [on contentious issues such as Syria] but also seek to deepen the
relationship everywhere we can", a senior diplomat said. Yet signs of a
rapprochement between Russia on the one hand and France and Germany on the other
pale into insignificance when set against their remaining disagreements. Paris
and Berlin have repeatedly condemned Russia's support for Bashar al-Assad in
Syria and its military interference in eastern Ukraine. They also joined the UK
in expelling Russian diplomats in March over the nerve agent poisoning of former
Soviet agent Sergei Skripal.

Anton Khlopkov, an analyst at the Centre for Energy and Security Studies, said
he was sceptical that Europe and Russia would be able to work together to
salvage the Iran deal, known as the JCPOA.

"The Europeans are too focused on the idea that Russia wants to undermine their
relaalso tionship with the US, and less focused on saving the JCPOA," he said.

Russian politicians agree. Grigory Yavlinsky, a veteran liberal politician, said
any talk of a thaw in relations between Europe and Russia was "wishful
thinking".

Mr Yavlinsky, who was one of the token challenger candidates who ran against Mr
Putin in the March presidential election, said the "first root cause" of the
chill between Moscow and western capitals was Russia's policy in Ukraine.

Relations would only improve if Russia agreed to discuss the status of Crimea,
which it annexed in 2014, pull out of eastern Ukraine and abandon his attempts
to compromise Ukraine's sovereignty. "But I don't see any signs [of that]," he
said.

Indeed, Mr Putin's most high-profile public appearance in weeks suggested that
he has no intention of backing down. On Thursday, he opened a bridge linking
Crimea with mainland Russia, a pet project built by a company controlled by his
billionaire friend, Arkady Rotenberg.

Although Mr Putin mainly touted the economic benefits the bridge would bring,
underlining the Kremlin's focus on improving people's livelihoods, his
appearance was condemned by several western governments.

Back in Sochi, Ms Merkel rejected the suggestion that more cordial relations
with Mr Putin were a sign that she was turning away from the US.

"We have a strong transatlantic friendship," she said. Through its history there
had been disputes and differences of opinion. "But this does not call into
question the intensity of that transatlantic relationship," she said.

'Putin feels himself to be the temporary winner in this new situation. He can't
quite believe his luck'

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: High-profile visit: Vladimir Putin welcomes Angela Merkel to talks in
the Black Sea resort of Sochi yesterday. Below, Emmanuel Macron - Kirill
Kudryavtsev /AFP/Getty Images

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              46 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 19, 2018 Saturday 10:00 AM GMT

The next Elena Ferrante? The best European fiction coming your way;
From a devastating French debut to a controversial Norwegian family saga: as
Britain prepares to split from Europe, we reveal the best new novels to bring
you closer to the continent

BYLINE: Aida Edemariam, Philip Oltermann, Angelique Chrisafis, James Hopkin,
Giles Tremlett, Tobias Jones, Shaun Walker and Ben McPherson

SECTION: BOOKS; Version:4

LENGTH: 4010 words


Between 2001 and 2015, sales of translated fiction grew by 96%. One reason,
argues Daniel Hahn, who last year established a prize for first translations, is
that publishers seem to be taking more account of what people actually want to
read. For a long time, he says, the emphasis was on "quite challenging, highbrow
literary fiction," which led to an unhelpful conflation of "difficult" with
"translated". Then Christoper MacLehose published Stieg Larsson's The Girl With
the Dragon Tattoo, which promptly sold 12,000 copies, in hardback.

"It seems to me," says Lisa Appignanesi, chair of this year's Man Booker
international prize, which is announced on 22 May, "we have become much more
interested in literature which is not conventional; there are different
traditions on the continent, which are not quite so emphatically led by
character and the movement of plot."

The important thing, then, is to be led by readers. Colm Tóibín, when not
writing his own fiction, commissions books for a tiny imprint called Tuskar
Rock. Two of their translated books are shortlisted for this year's Booker
international prize - Like a Fading Shadow  by Spanish author Antonio Muñoz
Molina and The World Goes On, by Hungarian novelist Laszlo Krasznahorkai. Some
years ago, Tóibín was asked to introduce Krasznahorkai at a reading in
Edinburgh, and "noticed that the venue was full". At which point he realised
that readers in English were no longer getting their information about books
from traditional sources, and that it was important to work out how they were
doing it and "try to tap into it".

So, in that spirit, we have looked around Europe - in this year when we are
preparing to leave it for ever - to find out what Europeans are reading, and
what we'll be reading next. Aida Edemariam

FRANCE: Gaël Faye

The rapper-turned-writer

Faye was 13 when he wrote his first poem. It was March 1995, and he had already
lived through two years of civil war in the tiny east African nation of Burundi
- sitting in school while gunshots rang out, navigating neighbourhoods carved up
by rival ethnic gangs, seeing the remains of bodies burned alive in the street.
"I started writing because I was scared," Faye says. "We were living in hell.
Writing did me a lot of good."

Days later, Faye's French father put his children on an emergency repatriation
plane to France. When Faye eventually began a new life in a Paris suburb near
Versailles, he was weighed down by war and trauma, navigating all the race and
identity issues of discrimination in the banlieues.

By his 20s, Faye was a successful hip-hop artist. It was a literary editor in
Paris, whose son listened to Faye's music, who suggested he consider fiction.
The result - Petit Pays ( Small Country ) - his first novel, about a 10-year-old
who comes of age during the Burundi civil war, has become a bestseller in
France, leading to literary prizes and translation deals across the world. Its
page-turning appeal lies in its deceptively gentle style: there is the tinkling
of cutlery on plates, the mother silently massaging her temples, while beyond
the front door, ethnic violence creeps up like a rising tide. It is a window
into the minds of families forced to flee conflict. There are flashes of the
young narrator's adult life in a "dormitory town" outside Paris, where he sits
in a bar watching refugees arriving on boats on the TV news, thinking: "What
about the country inside them? No one ever mentions that."

In the living room of his neat Paris flat, Faye is on a break from his current
hip-hop tour. At 36, he still raps and makes music, although he is now better
known for his novel and is working on two new pieces of fiction. Well liked in
the music industry for his politeness and calm, Faye dislikes the
rapper-turned-novelist label. He prefers to call himself simply a writer who
moves between different forms. "There's so much cliche around rap. I didn't want
people to presume a rapper would write a book in rhyme with style effects, full
of alliteration and wordplay. There's more freedom in writing a novel than the
music style I work in, with its strict rhythm-rhyme format. Writing a novel is
like being in the middle of an ocean and choosing where you want to float, but a
song is like a flowing river: there are river banks and you have to stay inside
them."

France was built by people from all over the world. To forget that is to forget
what it is to be French

In the novel, the father of the young central character, Gabriel, believes
children should stay out of politics. "But we couldn't help it," the 10-year-old
narrator says. "The atmosphere was becoming weirder by the day." The Hutu-Tutsi
ethnic conflict in Burundi and the genocide in neighbouring Rwanda that killed
up to a million people, is - from an inquisitive child's point of view -
terrifyingly absurd. Did the Hutus and Tutsis fall out because they didn't speak
the same language? No. Didn't share the same god? No. Then why, the child
wonders. "Because they don't have the same nose," he is told.

Like Faye's own mother, the narrator's mother is Rwandan, from the Tutsi
minority, and had fled to Burundi during the pogroms of the 1960s, then lost
family in the 1994 genocide. As an adult, the mixed-race Gabriel is asked by
women on dates in Paris to define his identity. "Human being," he replies. But
the novel shows that no matter how hard you try to sidestep it, war tries to
designate you an enemy.

Faye wanted to evoke what it's like to live in wartime, when murder becomes part
of everyday life. "When I was small, we went to the cinema and saw American war
films - Rambo, Chuck Norris movies. And we always thought war was explosions
everywhere and buildings falling down," he says. "But in fact war can also be a
life. You still go to school, you still obey your parents and, at the same time,
there are people who are being lynched in the street, you see people burned to
death when you're on your way to collect a letter or buy bread ... You live on
adrenaline, with permanent fear - it's hard for a child to have the notion they
could die at any moment. When I arrived in France, I noticed that compared to my
classmates, I didn't have the naivety of childhood. It had made me serious."

Faye began writing Small Country in 2015. It was the Paris terrorist attacks of
that year that gave him the idea of setting his novel in a calm cul-de-sac in a
comfortable area of the Burundi capital, Bujumbura, somewhere that seems shut
off from the war, but isn't. "The dead-end street where the children play - a
place you feel protected," Faye says. "But feeling protected is a trap, it stops
you seeing the world as it really is.

"The Paris attacks showed that you could go to a concert, you could go for
dinner on a restaurant terrace, and suddenly you could die," he says. And the
next day, some people were back at restaurant terraces, life continued. That's
what war was like for us, it was like that every day for two years in Burundi,
and I imagine in some countries - Lebanon, Iraq - people live that for years and
years. You have to understand how that wears down your nerves. You grow old much
quicker. That fear - week in, week out - ends up changing you profoundly."

If I had been able to talk to my mum, there wouldn't have been that irresistible
desire to write in order to understand

It was hard for Faye to talk about the war in Burundi to his mother, who had
escaped violence in Rwanda and lived as a refugee. "She would say: 'It's the
past, you have to look forward.'" That silence and his inability to speak his
mother's native language pained him, but ultimately led to the novel. "If I had
really been able to talk to my mum, there wouldn't have been that irresistible
desire to write in order to understand."

He wanted to show how war creeps up. "Before the violence, it's there in words,
gestures, in attitudes, relationships. It's never a sudden explosion. And if
we're not vigilant, with the words we use, political decisions, war can happen."

Small Country - like much of Faye's hip-hop - is also about race. Irritated by
society's definition of mixed race as something that is "50-50", Faye, whose
French father is white and Rwandan mother is black, prefers to see mixed race
identity as 100%, a whole. He feels African, European, French, Rwandan,
Burundian all at the same time. In the novel, the mixed race child Gabriel moves
between settings as an insider-outsider. "It's as if you belong without really
belonging," says Faye. "It's almost like a reader, who belongs to the story but
doesn't belong to the story. I found that interesting: to have a character who
wasn't on one side or the other, but on the border."

Faye briefly lived in London in his 20s, where he worked for an investment fund,
and recently relocated for a while to the Rwandan capital, Kigali, to experience
a new Rwanda, beyond his family's story of the genocide. But much of his hip-hop
is about French society and its identity problems - a society that has turned in
on itself, stigmatising those with immigrant roots. "I'm ill at ease with the
idea of a country that promotes such great values through its literature and
ideas and at the same time has seen a growing intolerance. France is at a
crossroads. It was built by people from all over the world. To forget that is to
forget what it is to be French."

Faye still hasn't returned to those first poems he wrote in the days before
fleeing Burundi. "They are in a box at my mum's house. When I was writing Small
Country I wondered if I should reread them, but I was afraid to. I didn't want
the book to be an autobiography and I wanted people to be able to understand it
even if they weren't from Burundi or Rwanda." He takes a breath. "Maybe I'll
reread them one day, but not right now." Angelique Chrisafis

·                      Small Country                     , translated by Sarah
Ardizzone, is published by Hogarth on 7 June.

NORWAY: Vigdis Hjorth

The controversial family saga

Hjorth is a highly respected novelist with a 30-year career. Like her fellow
Norwegian Karl Ove Knausgaard, whose six-volume work My Struggle  became an
international phenomenon, Hjorth often uses her own life as inspiration.  Arv og
miljø ( Wills and Testaments ), published in Norway in 2016, is a family drama
about the settling of a father's will, told by the family's eldest daughter, now
a middle-aged woman. The settlement is overshadowed by memories of being abused
by her father when she was five.

The book was praised when it came out in 2016. "Hjorth parcels out the secrets
with a precision worthy of Ibsen," wrote Ingunn Økland, chief reviewer at
Aftenposten. But it was also controversial. Norway is a small country, and
people who knew Hjorth's family thought they recognised many of the events and
characters depicted. This was a novel that people could enjoy either as high
literature or as a work of down-and-dirty revenge. The tabloids loved it as much
as the broadsheets, and it became the bestselling novel of the year.

The narrator's sisters do not come out of it well. They collude with the father
and refuse to believe the narrator's story of abuse. They are rewarded for their
silence; each receives a holiday cabin in the father's will. The narrator does
not. Hjorth's younger sister Helga was appalled. "I recognised everything the
reviews described: the cabins in Toffelsø; the arguments about the will and the
valuations ... [everything] was taken from our life, from my life." Helga
considered suing for defamation, but although she is a lawyer, it's very hard to
prove libel in a Norwegian court. Instead she took a writing course and wrote
her own novel, Fri vilje  ( Free Will ). In Helga Hjorth's version, the facts
remain largely the same, but this time her father is innocent, and her famous
sister is a troublemaker. In August 2017, a year after Wills and Testaments  was
published, Free Will topped the book charts in Norway. Everyone was talking
about it, comparing it with the original. "This is the novel in weaponised
form," said the national broadcaster's arts correspondent Agnes Moxnes. Vigdis
Hjorth is sanguine about her sister's score-settling. For her it simply confirms
the central point of her own novel: that one person's reality is another
person's lie. Ben McPherson

·                     Wills and Testaments, translated by Charlotte Barslund,
will be published by Verso.

SPAIN: Fernando Aramburu

The political blockbuster

Is Aramburu the Tolstoy of the Basque country, author of a Spanish language War
and Peace that lays bare the pain of 40 pointless years of separatist terrorism?
Or is he a Spanish JM Coetzee, publicly self-flagellating about the hypocrisies
of one of the country's most prosperous but also most intolerant regions? The
58-year-old novelist has been compared to both - thanks to a blockbusting
640-page saga of the Basque conflict, Patria (homeland), which has sold 700,000
copies, is in development as an HBO series (in Spanish) and has just won the
Strega Europeo award in Italy.

When it came to opposing dictator Francisco Franco, the militant Basque
separatists of Eta were among the few to pick up weapons. It was they who
assassinated Franco's heir apparent, Admiral Luis Carrero Blanco. Despite an
amnesty, however, Eta did not give up violence when democracy arrived in the
1970s. The bloody inertia that provoked more than 800 deaths after that is the
subject of Aramburu's book, set in a small town where Eta and its violent
supporters exercise almost totalitarian control.

Aramburu has become a key player in a battle to control the narrative about
recent Basque history

With this book, which has spent 18 months on Spain's bestseller lists, Aramburu
has become a key player in a battle to control the narrative about recent Basque
history. While some still see Eta's members as valiant militants and martyrs, he
sides with the victims - policemen, politicians, judges, journalists and those
who fought the asphyxiating conformity imposed on the heartland towns and
villages near San Sebastián. The heroes in Patria are those who either resist or
wake up to Eta's moral redundancy. Aramburu himself has talked of seeking Eta's
"literary defeat" (adding to its political defeat, since the group disbanded
earlier this month).

Critics accuse him of creating a blunt political instrument whose simplistic
moralising relies on stereotypical characters. Others, however, praise his
literary skill. Six hundred-page novels are not usually easy to digest, but
Patria - divided into more than 100 short chapters - can be binge-read. Perhaps
the test will be whether it transcends cultural frontiers. Giles Tremlett

· Patria, English                     translator TBC,                     will
be published by Picador in spring 2019.

GERMANY: JULI ZEH

The tech dystopia

German literature, once notorious for digging through the past in search of
answers to the 20th century's unanswerables, is becoming increasingly fixated on
the future. Juli Zeh's 2016 novel  Unterleuten ( Among-people ) demonstrated her
talent for turning social debates into bestsellers, and she has been described
by Deutschlandradio as the rightful heir to Günther Grass and Heinrich Böll. Her
latest book is  Leere Herzen  ( Empty Hearts ). In the year 2025, Angela Merkel
has resigned in the face of the rise of a so-called "Concerned Citizens
Movement". The UN is about to be dissolved, Frexit is in the air and Continuity
Occupy and Bavarian separatists are planning terrorist attacks.

But psychotherapist Britta Söldner and her colleague Babak Hamwi find that even
suicide bombings can be monetised: their agency The Bridge uses a powerful
algorithm to scrape wannabe jihadis from social media networks and match them
with fundamentalist organisations. "As the republic's first and only terror
service provider, The Bridge has pacified and stabilised its trade," Britta
reports proudly. "They provide the necessary level of threat that every society
needs."

Leading highbrow weekly Die Zeit has described  Empty Hearts as the German
equivalent of Michel Houellebecq's dystopian fantasy Submission. Its success
seems to suggest that in the country whose handling of the 2015 refugee crisis
divided its population and much of the rest of the world, fears about modern
technology loom just as large. Philip Oltermann

· Empty Hearts,                      English                     translator TBC,
will be published by Knopf Doubleday in 2019.

ITALY: Paolo Cognetti

The mountain hermit

Mountain literature hasn't always been a fashionable genre in Italian
publishing. In recent years, though, Italy's Alpine books have become
astonishingly successful. Mauro Corona, who lives in a half-abandoned hamlet in
the Dolomites, has become a prolific writer and proselytiser for primitive
living. And last year's Strega prize was won by Le otto montagne ( The Eight
Mountains), Paolo Cognetti's enchanting story of a boy who comes of age at
altitude. In Italy (a country with low levels of books sales) it has sold
320,000 copies, and rights have been sold in 38 countries.

Touted by some as the new Elena Ferrante, Cognetti's life story has added to the
appeal of the book. At 30, weary of city life and moved by Into the Wild -  the
true story of an American hiker who disappeared into the Alaskan wilderness - he
left Milan and went to live as a hermit at over 6,000 feet above sea level. In
the resulting memoir, Il Ragazzo Selvatico ( The Wild Child ), he meets gruff,
timeless characters, and his writing takes on their blunt honesty: "there's no
wilderness in the Alps," he wrote, "but a long history of human presence".
Cognetti duly became a sort of amateur archaeologist, analysing the traces of
that human presence and gently adding to it.

The Eight Mountains  is set in very similar territory: it's about an ascent to a
space where there are no "lords, armies, priests". The book's popularity lies
partly in its elemental romanticism: civilisation has been so stripped away that
skiers look like "aliens" and the only thing that stops cows being human is
their lack of a voice. But it's also become a bestseller because Italy is
undergoing something of an identity crisis. Most people complain that the
country is in terminal economic decline and that modernity isn't all it was
cracked up to be. There's a growing back-to-the-land movement, with endless
newspaper articles about, for example, a new generation of shepherds: educated
Italians who are leaving conurbations to head to the hills and look after sheep.
That, in some ways, is what Cognetti is doing: he toils at altitude, and tries
to preserve Italy's past for its future. Tobias Jones

·                      The Eight Mountains                     , translated by
Erica Segre and Simon Carnell, is published by Vintage.

CROATIA: Dasa Drndic

The literary historian

Reading Dasa Drndic is not for the faint hearted. Even Seid Serdarevic, Drndic's
publisher at the publishing house Fraktura, describes the experience of reading
her books as "being emotionally punched in the stomach all the time".
Nevertheless, the 71-year-old Croatian author is beginning to achieve fame
outside her homeland for novels that deal with some of the darker episodes of
20th-century history, and issues of memories and forgetting. Drndic has been
writing since the 1980s, but came to prominence with her 2007 novel Trieste. She
followed it up with Belladonna in 2012, and both are now available in English.

Perhaps the book's greatest strength is that it gives a voice to those people
who are unable to tell their own stories

Belladonna is ostensibly the story of the ageing Andreas Ban and his battle with
cancer. Ban is "a psychologist who does not psychologise any more. A writer who
no longer writes ... a tourist guide who no longer guides anyone anywhere." The
first 40 pages, in which Ban receives his diagnosis, are a relentless portrayal
of "repugnant" physical decay. But it is the deterioration of memories that is
quickly established as the book's main theme.

The novel switches between various periods in Ban's life, and dances from one
historical tragedy to another - from the second world war, to communism, to
sectarianism in the 1990s Balkan wars. Ban, as Drndic once was, is a Croat
living in Belgrade, who, as ethnic tensions mount, finds he is an outsider both
in Serbia and Croatia.

Drndic's novels, with their literary retellings of 20th century history and
fictionalised characters musing over factual events, have drawn comparisons to
WG Sebald. Real people, too, make frequent appearances, most notably the list of
over 2,000 children, spanning 15 pages, who were deported from the Netherlands
to concentration camps by the Nazis. "It is precisely about things which it is
impossible to speak of that one must speak," believes Ban. Anger radiates from
Drndic's pages, and perhaps the book's greatest strength is the way in which it
gives a voice to those people who are unable to tell their own stories. Shaun
Walker

·                      Belladonna                     , translated by Celia
Hawkesworth is published by MacLehose.

POLAND: Olga Tokarczuk

The Booker nominee

She is by no means an overtly political writer, yet Tokarczuk's work has come to
be seen as an implicit challenge to the incumbent Law and Justice party's (PiS)
steady erosion of human rights. Though it is her novel  Bieguni  ( Flights )
that has been shortlisted for next week's Man Booker international prize, it is
Prowadz swój plug przez kosci umarlych ( Drive Your Plow Over the Bones of the
Dead ) that is back in the spotlight, thanks to Pokot (Spoor), a film adaptation
by Agnieszka Holland.

The novel, whose title is taken from a line in William Blake's The Marriage of
Heaven and Hell, is narrated by Janina Duszejko, a 60-something former engineer,
now an English teacher and caretaker of dilapidated summer homes along the
Czech-Polish border. "I love crossing borders," she declares, about life on the
other side, where "the language isn't suited to quarrelling" - unlike in her own
country, "a land of neurotic egotists".

Indeed, the novel is haunted by an acute awareness of how language is used to
manipulate us. Though Duszejko is having none of it. An ostensibly humble
vigilante, she has a way with words, writing to the authorities to deplore their
lack of action and accountability, and awarding her friends monikers such as
"Oddball" and "Good News". To perceive and cultivate difference, to rename, she
believes, are simple means of resistance.

Duszejko's deep concern for the natural environment manifests itself in a fierce
anti-hunting stance allied to an increasingly desperate lament for the
decimation of her country's very own "green and pleasant land". Her conviction
clearly speaks to Polish readers: at recent demonstrations against the logging
of the Bialowieza forest, one banner read, "Janina Duszejko won't forgive you!"
James Hopkin

· Drive Your Plow over the Bones of the Dead, translated by Antonia Lloyd-Jones
is due out from Fitzcarraldo Editions in September. The winner of the
Man Booker International prize                      will be announced on 22 May.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              47 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                        The Independent - Daily Edition

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                 First Edition

Skripals could be 'relocated abroad with new identities'

BYLINE: LIZZIE DEARDEN AND KIM SENGUPTA

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1281 words


British security services are considering whether to move poisoned Russian spy
Sergei Skripal and his daughter abroad, The Independent understands. Mr Skripal
has been discharged from hospital and is being treated for nerve agent exposure
at an undisclosed location, following daughter Yulia Skripal's release last
month.

Sources say both victims are being kept in safe houses and have been interviewed
by police, while security services consider whether to move them a different
country for their safety. A former military intelligence officer said the
Skripals could be given new identities and even appearances for their own
protection, while being minded by MI6.

"Mr Skripal will almost certainly be moved location," Philip Ingram said. "He
might well be offered a new identity. These sorts of things are not straight
forward, but it is work the intelligence services are used to doing and can set
that up."

The Independent understands police have still not yet identified a suspect in
the poisoning, almost 11 weeks after the pair were attacked in Salisbury.
Counter-terror officers continue to investigate the case as attempted murder,
after revealing the nerve agent was smeared on the handle of Mr Skripal's front
door.

The 66-year-old former double agent and his daughter were taken to intensive
care after falling unconscious on a bench on 4 March and a Court of Protection
hearing later that month saw doctors raise concern they could suffer permanent
brain damage. But Ms Skripal has made written statements after being released
from hospital on 9 April and police said her father is also making "good
progress".

Scotland Yard has declined to give any details of where the victims are being
treated or security operations, amid Russian government accusations of "kidnap".

"This is a complex investigation and detectives continue to gather and piece
together all the evidence to establish the full facts and circumstances behind
this dreadful attack," a spokesperson said. "In the interests of Sergei and
Yulia's safety, we will not be discussing any protective or security
arrangements that are in place."

In her latest statement, Ms Skripal said she was "safe and feeling better as
time goes by" and had access to friends, family and help from specialist
officers. She refused assistance from the Russian embassy and said she did not
want to speak to her cousin, Viktoria Skripal, who was denied a British visa for
a second time this week after giving numerous media interviews in Russia.

"Her opinions and assertions are not mine and they are not my father's," Ms
Skripal said. With the culprits still at large, national security adviser Sir
Mark Sedwill said security services were reviewing arrangements for other
Russian defectors living in the UK earlier this month.

Mr Skripal, a former military intelligence colonel, had been living openly under
his real name after being handed over in a 2010 spy swap and the attempted
assassination increased fears held by other defectors. Little over a week after
the attack in Salisbury, Russian businessman Nikolai Glushkov was found
strangled at his London home.

No one has been arrested in relation to his death and police investigations
continue. Scotland Yard said there was no immediate evidence of a link to the
attack on Mr Skripal, but Mr Glushkov's links to Russian dissident Boris
Berezovsky sparked fresh scrutiny over a string of suspicious deaths.

Ms Skripal was visiting her father from her home in Russia when the attack took
place and they unwittingly spread the nerve agent around Salisbury as they
visited a pub and restaurant on the day they fell ill.

Decontamination work is ongoing in the Wiltshire city to rid sites of any traces
of novichok, which was found to remain present in potentially toxic quantities
at designated "hotspots".

One of the first police officers to respond to the incident, DS Nick Bailey,
also fell seriously ill but was the first to be discharged.

Officials said Mr Skripal was still at an "important stage of his recovery" and
would be treated outside hospital.

Lorna Wilkinson, the director of nursing at Salisbury District Hospital, said:
"Treating him and the other two people poisoned by this nerve agent, while still
providing outstanding care to the other patients who rely on our hospital, has
been a huge and unprecedented challenge that I'm proud our staff have risen to."

A spokesperson for the NHS said they could not detail how the three victims were
treated, but that nerve agent poisoning "requires stabilising them, keeping them
alive until their bodies could produce more enzymes to replace those that had
been poisoned".

Cara Charles-Barks, chief executive of Salisbury District Hospital, hailed Mr
Skripal leaving as "fantastic news".

"That he, Yulia and DS Bailey have been able to leave us so soon after coming
into contact with this nerve agent is thanks to the hard work, skill and
professionalism of our clinicians, who provide outstanding care to all our
patients, day in and day out," she added.

"This has been a difficult time for those caught up in this incident - the
patients, our staff and the people of Salisbury. I want to thank the public for
their support, and I want to pay a special tribute to both the clinical staff
here at the trust and those who work so hard behind the scenes."

A small amount of nerve agent in liquid form is believed to have been used in
the attack, which sparked global diplomatic tensions.

The British government has accused Russia of culpability after identifying the
nerve agent used as one of the Soviet-developed novichok group and the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons confirmed its analysis.

The Kremlin has repeatedly denied any role in the attack on Mr Skripal, a former
double agent who was jailed for treason in Russia before moving to the UK
following a 2010 spy swap.

Russia has expelled Western diplomats in retaliation against its own
representatives being cast out, while expressing doubt over the authenticity of
the chemical analysis and Ms Skripal's statements.

Speaking at a press conference alongside Angela Merkel in Sochi, Vladimir Putin
wished Mr Skripal "good health" but suggested he would have "died on the spot"
if novichok had been used.

The Russian ambassador to Britain, Alexander Yakovenko, reiterated demands to
see the Skripals and accused the UK of flouting international law by refusing
consular access.

"You can call it detained, you can call it isolated, you can call it kidnap," he
said. "Unless we see them it is difficult to make a conclusion."

Mr Yakovenko added: "Nobody has seen their pictures, heard their voice and
whether they are alive. It is fine for us if they say they do not want our
services."

The Russian government initially promised to cooperate with the OPCW but has
since refused to recognise its findings, as with previous probes into nerve
agent attacks in Syria.

At a conference on chemical weapons in France, Boris Johnson discussed measures
to enforce an international convention signed by countries including Russia.

"We have to confront the reality that chemical weapons have been used numerous
times in recent years, in defiance of the 1997 Chemical Weapons Convention," the
foreign secretary said yesterday.

"Assad's brutality in Syria, and the attempted murders in Salisbury pose a grave
threat to the Chemical Weapons Convention and to the rules-based order that
keeps us all safe."

A government spokesman said the Skripals would still need ongoing care, adding:
"The fact that all three victims of this incident have been discharged from
hospital does not alter the fact this was a brazen and reckless attack -
attempted murder - using an illegal chemical weapon."

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2018 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                              48 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                        The Independent - Daily Edition

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                 First Edition

Pictures of the Day;
Five of the best images from around the world

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 104 words


Stargazing

Early in the morning the Milky Way dominates the sky over the Ormont valley in
Switzerland. EPA

Devoted in Dhaka

Muslims offer prayers on the first Friday of Ramadan in the Bangladeshi capital.
AP

Entente cordiale

Vladimir Putin and Angela Merkel meet for talks in Sochi on the Russian Black
Sea. AFP/Getty

Full house

Rafael Nadal serves to Fabio Fognini during the quarter-final at the Italian
Open in Rome. The Spaniard went on to win 4-6, 6-1, 6-2. AP

Spanish caravan

Pilgrims on the El Rocio pilgrimage, Spain's largest, cross the Quema river near
Seville. More than a million people make the journey each year. AFP/Getty

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2018 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                              49 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                        The Independent - Daily Edition

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                 First Edition

Merkel and Putin offer signs of thaw at Sochi talks

BYLINE: OLIVER CARROLL IN MOSCOW

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 499 words


From stern stares to intimidation by large dogs, relations between President
Vladimir Putin and Chancellor Angela Merkel have rarely strayed from tension.
For all the two leaders share - they speak each others' language and have become
heavyweights of international politics - politically, they could not be further
away from one another.

On sanctions, eastern Ukraine, Crimea, hacking, Syria and the Skripals, there
still is no common view. As far as Ms Merkel is concerned, Mr Putin has been
"living on another planet".

But as the German leader took part in talks in the Black Sea resort of Sochi,
the Russian leader's second residence, an unexpected rapprochement appears to be
in the making. At an interim press conference, Mr Putin lauded a "healthy"
renewed contact with Germany. And Ms Merkel agreed: "These negotiations are
important and they will continue."

For this, the leaders have Donald Trump to thank. The US president's decision to
withdraw from the Iran nuclear deal has set European leaders scrambling on a
mission to save it.

Russia, a close ally of Iran, has been only too keen to assist. The Kremlin also
senses an opportunity to return from international isolation, and, in time,
reduce European sanctions. To this end, Mr Putin has been unusually busy with
bilateral meetings over recent days. He is due to meet with French president
Emmanuel Macron within the week in St Petersburg.

"The meeting was planned before, but the timing came in handy," says Joseph
Janning, head of the Berlin office of the European Council for Foreign
Relations. "Merkel wanted to let Washington know that Germany does not wholly
depend on the US for international issues."

At the press conference, the leaders confirmed their agenda was broadly as
expected. There would be no discussion of sanctions, as the German side had
insisted. Instead, Iran, Syria, Ukraine and energy would take prominence.

There was also discussion of the Nordstream 2 gas pipeline connecting Russia to
Germany. This project represents a rare moment of economic agreement between the
countries, but it has not been without controversy. It has attracted the
criticism of Mr Trump, who has reportedly threatened a trade war, and Ukraine,
worried about losing lucrative transit fees.

Mr Putin seemed to provide guarantees that Russia would - reluctantly - continue
to pay to transit gas through Ukraine.

"Ukraine for some reason doesn't want to grow relations with us, but they are
still keen on money," he told journalists. "We're not against the idea ??? the
deliveries will continue through Ukraine provided they are economically viable."

Earlier, a Kremlin spokesman suggested that the meeting had happened because the
world leaders now found themselves on the same page. "When opinions coincide,
then countries at the very least become a bit closer to one another," said
presidential aide Yuri Ushakov.

Ms Merkel was less committal. "We have different points of view, but we need to
come closer, to discuss the facts," she said.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2018 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                              50 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Beer and flowers as Merkel and Putin start the big thaw

BYLINE: David Charter ;Matthew Bodner

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 518 words


Angela Merkel and Vladimir Putin showed a renewed willingness to co-operate
yesterday as they emphasised common challenges in response to President Trump's
America First policies. Relations between Germany and Russia have been in the
deep freeze since the annexation of Crimea in 2014 but the beginning of a thaw
was evident at President Putin's first bilateral meeting for a year with Mrs
Merkel at the Black Sea resort of Sochi.

Speaking at a joint press conference they defended the $11 billion Nord Stream 2
pipeline deal, which will double the amount of natural gas delivered from Russia
to Germany and which has been subject to fierce US criticism. They also repeated
their support for the Iran nuclear deal repudiated by Mr Trump.

Their words conveyed the closest alignment of mutual interests since the
Russian-backed revolt began in eastern Ukraine more than four years ago. Mr
Putin even gave assurances that Ukraine would not necessarily lose out on gas
transit fees once Nord Stream 2 opens, as is feared.

Huge differences remain, notably Moscow's backing for President Assad of Syria,
but with personal criticism of Mr Trump growing louder in Berlin and Paris, Mr
Putin seized the moment. "Donald is not just the US president, he is also a
good, tough entrepreneur," he told reporters. "He is promoting the interests of
his business, to ensure the sales of liquefied natural gas on the European
market. But it depends on us, how we build our relations with our partners, it
will depend on our partners in Europe. We believe [the pipeline] is beneficial
for us. We will fight for it."

The German chancellor avoided a direct attack on Mr Trump but conveyed her
annoyance. "We have a strong transatlantic friendship, which during its history
has had to withstand many questions of different opinions. I think that might be
the case now," she said.

The effort at a new start for Russia and Germany was shown by the bouquet of
pink-and-white roses Mrs Merkel received from Mr Putin. She reciprocated with a
case of Radeberger, his favourite German beer, brewed in Saxony.

The increased urgency for western Europe to work with Mr Putin will again be in
evidence when President Macron of France visits the annual St Petersburg
International Economic Forum next week. Another test of any thaw in relations
will be the football World Cup hosted by Russia in June and July, which British
politicians and officials have vowed to boycott over the Salisbury nerve agent
attack in March.

EU sanctions on Russia over its aggression in Ukraine were driven by Germany and
are unlikely to end soon, as peace there remains elusive. There were more signs
yesterday, however, of how much Mrs Merkel needs the assistance of Mr Putin. She
was horrified by a recent decree from Assad that would confiscate unclaimed
properties in Syria, potentially removing a big incentive for the 700,000
Syrians who have found sanctuary in Germany to leave.

"This is very bad news for all of those who want to return to Syria one day,"
Mrs Merkel said yesterday, putting subtle pressure on Mr Putin to use his
influence over the Assad regime.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: From Russia with love: Mr Putin meets Mrs Merkel with a bouquet of
roses

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              51 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Beer and flowers as Merkel and Putin start the big thaw

BYLINE: David Charter;Matthew Bodner

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 518 words


Angela Merkel and Vladimir Putin showed a renewed willingness to co-operate
yesterday as they emphasised common challenges in response to President Trump's
America First policies. Relations between Germany and Russia have been in the
deep freeze since the annexation of Crimea in 2014 but the beginning of a thaw
was evident at President Putin's first bilateral meeting for a year with Mrs
Merkel at the Black Sea resort of Sochi.

Speaking at a joint press conference they defended the $11 billion Nord Stream 2
pipeline deal, which will double the amount of natural gas delivered from Russia
to Germany and which has been subject to fierce US criticism. They also repeated
their support for the Iran nuclear deal repudiated by Mr Trump.

Their words conveyed the closest alignment of mutual interests since the
Russian-backed revolt began in eastern Ukraine more than four years ago. Mr
Putin even gave assurances that Ukraine would not necessarily lose out on gas
transit fees once Nord Stream 2 opens, as is feared.

Huge differences remain, notably Moscow's backing for President Assad of Syria,
but with personal criticism of Mr Trump growing louder in Berlin and Paris, Mr
Putin seized the moment. "Donald is not just the US president, he is also a
good, tough entrepreneur," he told reporters. "He is promoting the interests of
his business, to ensure the sales of liquefied natural gas on the European
market. But it depends on us, how we build our relations with our partners, it
will depend on our partners in Europe. We believe [the pipeline] is beneficial
for us. We will fight for it."

The German chancellor avoided a direct attack on Mr Trump but conveyed her
annoyance. "We have a strong transatlantic friendship, which during its history
has had to withstand many questions of different opinions. I think that might be
the case now," she said.

The effort at a new start for Russia and Germany was shown by the bouquet of
pink-and-white roses Mrs Merkel received from Mr Putin. She reciprocated with a
case of Radeberger, his favourite German beer, brewed in Saxony.

The increased urgency for western Europe to work with Mr Putin will again be in
evidence when President Macron of France visits the annual St Petersburg
International Economic Forum next week. Another test of any thaw in relations
will be the football World Cup hosted by Russia in June and July, which British
politicians and officials have vowed to boycott over the Salisbury nerve agent
attack in March.

EU sanctions on Russia over its aggression in Ukraine were driven by Germany and
are unlikely to end soon, as peace there remains elusive. There were more signs
yesterday, however, of how much Mrs Merkel needs the assistance of Mr Putin. She
was horrified by a recent decree from Assad that would confiscate unclaimed
properties in Syria, potentially removing a big incentive for the 700,000
Syrians who have found sanctuary in Germany to leave.

"This is very bad news for all of those who want to return to Syria one day,"
Mrs Merkel said yesterday, putting subtle pressure on Mr Putin to use his
influence over the Assad regime.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: From Russia with love: Mr Putin meets Mrs Merkel with a bouquet of
roses

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              52 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 19, 2018 Saturday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

Beer and flowers as Merkel and Putin start the big thaw

BYLINE: David Charter ;Matthew Bodner

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 518 words


Angela Merkel and Vladimir Putin showed a renewed willingness to co-operate
yesterday as they emphasised common challenges in response to President Trump's
America First policies. Relations between Germany and Russia have been in the
deep freeze since the annexation of Crimea in 2014 but the beginning of a thaw
was evident at President Putin's first bilateral meeting for a year with Mrs
Merkel at the Black Sea resort of Sochi.

Speaking at a joint press conference they defended the $11 billion Nord Stream 2
pipeline deal, which will double the amount of natural gas delivered from Russia
to Germany and which has been subject to fierce US criticism. They also repeated
their support for the Iran nuclear deal repudiated by Mr Trump.

Their words conveyed the closest alignment of mutual interests since the
Russian-backed revolt began in eastern Ukraine more than four years ago. Mr
Putin even gave assurances that Ukraine would not necessarily lose out on gas
transit fees once Nord Stream 2 opens, as is feared.

Huge differences remain, notably Moscow's backing for President Assad of Syria,
but with personal criticism of Mr Trump growing louder in Berlin and Paris, Mr
Putin seized the moment. "Donald is not just the US president, he is also a
good, tough entrepreneur," he told reporters. "He is promoting the interests of
his business, to ensure the sales of liquefied natural gas on the European
market. But it depends on us, how we build our relations with our partners, it
will depend on our partners in Europe. We believe [the pipeline] is beneficial
for us. We will fight for it."

The German chancellor avoided a direct attack on Mr Trump but conveyed her
annoyance. "We have a strong transatlantic friendship, which during its history
has had to withstand many questions of different opinions. I think that might be
the case now," she said.

The effort at a new start for Russia and Germany was shown by the bouquet of
pink-and-white roses Mrs Merkel received from Mr Putin. She reciprocated with a
case of Radeberger, his favourite German beer, brewed in Saxony.

The increased urgency for western Europe to work with Mr Putin will again be in
evidence when President Macron of France visits the annual St Petersburg
International Economic Forum next week. Another test of any thaw in relations
will be the football World Cup hosted by Russia in June and July, which British
politicians and officials have vowed to boycott over the Salisbury nerve agent
attack in March.

EU sanctions on Russia over its aggression in Ukraine were driven by Germany and
are unlikely to end soon, as peace there remains elusive. There were more signs
yesterday, however, of how much Mrs Merkel needs the assistance of Mr Putin. She
was horrified by a recent decree from Assad that would confiscate unclaimed
properties in Syria, potentially removing a big incentive for the 700,000
Syrians who have found sanctuary in Germany to leave.

"This is very bad news for all of those who want to return to Syria one day,"
Mrs Merkel said yesterday, putting subtle pressure on Mr Putin to use his
influence over the Assad regime.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: From Russia with love: Mr Putin meets Mrs Merkel with a bouquet of
roses

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              53 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Italy could yet blow the European Union apart;
The euro has been a tragedy for the country and a new populist coalition is
itching to cause trouble

BYLINE: JEREMY WARNER

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 831 words


For the political class in the UK, Brexit has become an allconsuming obsession,
sucking the oxygen out of virtually everything else. Yet for the EU's high
command in Berlin, Brussels, and Paris, it is but one of a multitude of crises,
and, despite the importance we attach to it, far from the most significant of
them.

Most of these crises, including Brexit, might, on the other hand, be said to
have a common cause - Europe's reckless and deeply divisive rush to monetary
union. From the start, the single currency was a classic case of attempting to
run before learning to walk, or as the Daily Telegraph put it in a leader at the
time of Maastricht, it piled "Mount Pelion on Mount Ossa".

Instinctively, the UK recognised the risks, and determined to remain apart,
thereby putting itself on an eventual collision course with an EU intent on ever
greater levels of sovereign subversion to support the foolishness of its
monetary experiment.

Most of the countries that have signed up to the euro are still a million miles
from being ready for a common currency with Germany. For the first seven or
eight years, things muddled along without serious mishap, but beneath the
apparent calm the single currency was incubating the mother of all economic and
financial crises. Voluminous money printing by the European Central Bank
eventually succeeded in extinguishing the worst of the fires, but the crisis
never entirely went away, and now, with the possible formation of a populist
government in Italy, it threatens to come storming back again.

Most of Italy's problems are home grown; the great tragedy of modern Italy, the
birthplace of much of what is good and civilised in the world, is that it has
become little more than a museum, a place of entrenched vested interest and
immunity to serious political, judicial and labour market reform.

Yet the euro has greatly compounded this predicament. By imposing inappropriate
macroeconomic policies and an uncompetitive exchange rate, monetary union has
made an already dire condition very much worse. Almost unbelievably, the economy
hasn't grown in nearly 20 years, a hiatus whose duration is unprecedented in the
modern age.

There is a lot of love among British Eurosceptics for Italy's new brand of
populist political leader, as there was at the beginning for the hard-Left
Syriza-led government in Greece. My enemy's enemy is my friend seems to be the
logic; anything that pushes against Brussels is by definition welcome, however
deluded the proposed policy agenda.

But deluded, incoherent and utopian it most certainly is, to judge by what has
so far been said by and attributed to the mooted Five Star alliance with La Lega
Nord, a bizarre and manifestly unstable pick and mix of Left and Right that
combines a flatrate tax to satisfy the more prosperous north with guaranteed
handouts for the impoverished south. The chances of the alliance holding
together seem remote, which is partly why markets have so far been relatively
relaxed about the threat it poses.

What unites these two very different brands of populism, however, is a
determination to kick against the political establishments of both Rome and
Brussels. They don't so much want to leave the euro - with the entire financial
system denominated in euros, including the vast bulk of debt, it would in any
case be virtually impossible without instantly bankrupting the country - as blow
it up from within.

Similar threats from Greece's Syriza were easily swotted away; Greece was too
small to hold the eurozone to ransom. But Italy is another matter. If Italy
blows, the whole thing will blow.

Luigi Di Maio, leader of the Five Star Movement, says he senses fear among the
Eurocrats; they would be right to be scared, because by proposing a
"pre-Maastricht" economic policy setting, he threatens to drive a coach and
horses through the fiscal rules that stand at the centre of Europe's monetary
union.

He also proposes that the European Central Bank cancels (EURO)250 billion of the
government bonds bought trying to stem the previous Italian debt crisis, making
the ECB doubly wary of applying the same strategy a second time. Both proposals
are anathema to Berlin, which rightly fears being left with the tab.

Yet to push Italy out of the euro would be to risk catastrophic loss to Germany
as well. When you owe the bank just a little, goes the saying, then you've got a
problem, but when you owe it a lot, it is the bank that has the problem. The
same holds true for Germany's exposure to Italy.

If Angela Merkel wants to save the euro in its current form, she is going to
have to row back on her previously uncompromising stance, and loosen the fiscal
straitjacket. Yet she is caught between a rock and a hard place: to do so risks
a further political backlash at home.

Brexit? This is but a minor irritant compared to the wider rebellion the EU's
hubris has brought on our benighted continent.

follow Jeremy Warner on Twitter @jeremywarneruk; read more at
www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2018 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              54 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

Berlin in quandary over how to spend more on military;
Germany's stretched armed forces expected to struggle with modest budget rise

BYLINE: TOBIAS BUCK

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 846 words


The German government is facing growing pressure at home and abroad to spend
more money on its armed forces.

In Berlin, however, officials and analysts have started to debate an altogether
different question: if the money is found, can it actually be put to use? Four
years ago Angela Merkel, the chancellor, signed up to a new Nato target
committing member countries to spend 2 per cent of gross domestic product on
defence. The call to raise military spending has gained additional urgency amid
a flurry of alarmist reports about gaps in staffing and equipment at the
Bundeswehr, or German army.

The government responded this week with a promise to raise the military budget
from 1.2 per cent of GDP last year to 1.5 per cent in 2025.

The increase would mean billions more euros to buy tanks, drones and aeroplanes
and to hire and train thousands of extra soldiers and civilian staff. But the
pledge would still leave Germany far off the 2 per cent mark and well below
levels in the US, Britain, France and other western countries.

Neither Ms Merkel nor Ursula von der Leyen, the defence minister, have dared to
call into question the Nato commitment. But defence experts warn that the
stretched armed forces will find it hard to absorb even modest increases
prom-ised now. Raising expenditure to 2 per cent of GDP is widely seen as
unrealistic even if the political will were there.

"Germany spent (EURO)37bn on defence last year. If we wanted to spend 2 per cent
of GDP on defence by 2024 that would mean almost doubling the budget to around
(EURO)72bn," said Hans-Peter Bartels, the armed forces commissioner of the
German parliament. "We cannot just double the size of the Bundeswehr. How is
this going to work?" Marcel Dickow, a defence expert at the German Institute for
International and Security Affairs, makes a similar point: "The Bundeswehr
cannot spend that kind of money. It does not have the procedures in place and it
wouldn't even know what to spend it on."

With much of the defence budget fixed (more than 20 per cent is spent on rents
and pensions alone) the key variable is the portion set aside to buy weapons and
equipment. Yet staff shortages, inefficiencies and administrative bottlenecks
mean the defence ministry already struggles to spend its procurement budget in
full. Last year it was supposed to buy arms and equipment worth (EURO)5.9bn. In
the end, some (EURO)600m went unspent, despite glaring holes and shortfalls
across the entire military.

Part of the problem lies with the defence procurement office in Koblenz, a
notoriously slow-moving and understaffed body known as BAAINBw. On paper it has
6,500 staff but 1,100 of those posts are unfilled, putting a brake on procedures
and programmes. Critics say a deeper concern is its bureaucratic approach to
buying. It issues highly detailed specifications even for simple products such
as uniforms.

For more complex equipment, the list of official requirements can run to
thousands of pages. "The result is that we are not in a position to defend
ourselves properly because the things we need urgently we simply cannot acquire
urgently," said Christian Mölling, a defence expert at the German Council on
Foreign Relations.

Twenty-five years of budget cuts had left their mark on German defence
suppliers, he said. "Manufacturing sites have been closed, and many producers
have shifted towards a just-in-time model. That means that in some areas, the
supply chain for spare parts has broken down. With some military aircraft, for
example, spare parts are simply no longer being produced."

He added: "There are things that you cannot simply fix with more money."

Matters have grown so dire that several crucial weapons systems are barely
usable. According to the latest assessment by Mr Bartels' office, only 95 out of
255 Leopard II tanks were in service last year. Such shortfalls, moreover, often
have a direct impact on the Bundeswehr's ability to recruit and maintain staff.
"Planes are grounded so pilots don't get enough flying hours, which makes their
job less attractive and they leave. But it also makes it harder to train new
pilots. Everything is connected with everything," said Mr Bartels.

For much the same reason, defence experts see little point in pushing for a
quick spending spree. In many cases, the Bundeswehr does not even have the
technical staff to validate and certify new equipment for use.

"For every new A400M [transport aircraft] you need to hire and train a lot of
new people. You can't do that overnight. These are processes that take 15 or 20
years," said Mr Dickow.

Analysts agree a defence budget worth 2 per cent of GDP will remain little more
than a lofty ambition for years. But a gradual rise towards 1.5 per cent as
proposed by Ms von der Leyen strikes most as realistic and desirable.

"You don't have to spend 2 per cent of GDP on defence to meet the tasks the
Bundeswehr has set itself," said Mr Mölling. "But we do have to spend a lot more
than now, so let's start doing it."

'We cannot just double the size of the Bundeswehr. How is this going to work?'
Hans-Peter Bartels

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Frontline concerns: German troops with armoured vehicles during a
military exerciseValda Kalnina/EPA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              55 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

Berlin in quandary over how to spend more on military;
Germany's stretched armed forces expected to struggle with modest budget rise

BYLINE: TOBIAS BUCK

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 846 words


The German government is facing growing pressure at home and abroad to spend
more money on its armed forces.

In Berlin, however, officials and analysts have started to debate an altogether
different question: if the money is found, can it actually be put to use? Four
years ago Angela Merkel, the chancellor, signed up to a new Nato target
committing member countries to spend 2 per cent of gross domestic product on
defence. The call to raise military spending has gained additional urgency amid
a flurry of alarmist reports about gaps in staffing and equipment at the
Bundeswehr, or German army.

The government responded this week with a promise to raise the military budget
from 1.2 per cent of GDP last year to 1.5 per cent in 2025.

The increase would mean billions more euros to buy tanks, drones and aeroplanes
and to hire and train thousands of extra soldiers and civilian staff. But the
pledge would still leave Germany far off the 2 per cent mark and well below
levels in the US, Britain, France and other western countries.

Neither Ms Merkel nor Ursula von der Leyen, the defence minister, have dared to
call into question the Nato commitment. But defence experts warn that the
stretched armed forces will find it hard to absorb even modest increases
prom-ised now. Raising expenditure to 2 per cent of GDP is widely seen as
unrealistic even if the political will were there.

"Germany spent (EURO)37bn on defence last year. If we wanted to spend 2 per cent
of GDP on defence by 2024 that would mean almost doubling the budget to around
(EURO)72bn," said Hans-Peter Bartels, the armed forces commissioner of the
German parliament. "We cannot just double the size of the Bundeswehr. How is
this going to work?" Marcel Dickow, a defence expert at the German Institute for
International and Security Affairs, makes a similar point: "The Bundeswehr
cannot spend that kind of money. It does not have the procedures in place and it
wouldn't even know what to spend it on."

With much of the defence budget fixed (more than 20 per cent is spent on rents
and pensions alone) the key variable is the portion set aside to buy weapons and
equipment. Yet staff shortages, inefficiencies and administrative bottlenecks
mean the defence ministry already struggles to spend its procurement budget in
full. Last year it was supposed to buy arms and equipment worth (EURO)5.9bn. In
the end, some (EURO)600m went unspent, despite glaring holes and shortfalls
across the entire military.

Part of the problem lies with the defence procurement office in Koblenz, a
notoriously slow-moving and understaffed body known as BAAINBw. On paper it has
6,500 staff but 1,100 of those posts are unfilled, putting a brake on procedures
and programmes. Critics say a deeper concern is its bureaucratic approach to
buying. It issues highly detailed specifications even for simple products such
as uniforms.

For more complex equipment, the list of official requirements can run to
thousands of pages. "The result is that we are not in a position to defend
ourselves properly because the things we need urgently we simply cannot acquire
urgently," said Christian Mölling, a defence expert at the German Council on
Foreign Relations.

Twenty-five years of budget cuts had left their mark on German defence
suppliers, he said. "Manufacturing sites have been closed, and many producers
have shifted towards a just-in-time model. That means that in some areas, the
supply chain for spare parts has broken down. With some military aircraft, for
example, spare parts are simply no longer being produced."

He added: "There are things that you cannot simply fix with more money."

Matters have grown so dire that several crucial weapons systems are barely
usable. According to the latest assessment by Mr Bartels' office, only 95 out of
255 Leopard II tanks were in service last year. Such shortfalls, moreover, often
have a direct impact on the Bundeswehr's ability to recruit and maintain staff.
"Planes are grounded so pilots don't get enough flying hours, which makes their
job less attractive and they leave. But it also makes it harder to train new
pilots. Everything is connected with everything," said Mr Bartels.

For much the same reason, defence experts see little point in pushing for a
quick spending spree. In many cases, the Bundeswehr does not even have the
technical staff to validate and certify new equipment for use.

"For every new A400M [transport aircraft] you need to hire and train a lot of
new people. You can't do that overnight. These are processes that take 15 or 20
years," said Mr Dickow.

Analysts agree a defence budget worth 2 per cent of GDP will remain little more
than a lofty ambition for years.

But a gradual rise towards 1.5 per cent as proposed by Ms von der Leyen strikes
most as realistic and desirable.

"You don't have to spend 2 per cent of GDP on defence to meet the tasks the
Bundeswehr has set itself," said Mr Mölling. "But we do have to spend a lot more
than now, so let's start doing it."

'We cannot just double the size of the Bundeswehr. How is this going to work?'
Hans-Peter Bartels

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Frontline concerns: German troops with armoured vehicles during a
military exercise Valda Kalnina/EPASources: German finance ministry; German
defence ministry; Munich Security Report 2018; OECD; Nato; World Bank;
INTERNATIONAL Institute for Strategic Studies; The Military Balance

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              56 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Berlin in quandary over how to spend more on military;
Germany's stretched armed forces expected to struggle with modest budget rise

BYLINE: TOBIAS BUCK

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 846 words


The German government is facing growing pressure at home and abroad to spend
more money on its armed forces.

In Berlin, however, officials and analysts have started to debate an altogether
different question: if the money is found, can it actually be put to use? Four
years ago Angela Merkel, the chancellor, signed up to a new Nato target
committing member countries to spend 2 per cent of gross domestic product on
defence. The call to raise military spending has gained additional urgency amid
a flurry of alarmist reports about gaps in staffing and equipment at the
Bundeswehr, or German army.

The government responded this week with a promise to raise the military budget
from 1.2 per cent of GDP last year to 1.5 per cent in 2025.

The increase would mean billions more euros to buy tanks, drones and aeroplanes
and to hire and train thousands of extra soldiers and civilian staff. But the
pledge would still leave Germany far off the 2 per cent mark and well below
levels in the US, Britain, France and other western countries.

Neither Ms Merkel nor Ursula von der Leyen, the defence minister, have dared to
call into question the Nato commitment. But defence experts warn that the
stretched armed forces will find it hard to absorb even modest increases
prom-ised now. Raising expenditure to 2 per cent of GDP is widely seen as
unrealistic even if the political will were there.

"Germany spent (EURO)37bn on defence last year. If we wanted to spend 2 per cent
of GDP on defence by 2024 that would mean almost doubling the budget to around
(EURO)72bn," said Hans-Peter Bartels, the armed forces commissioner of the
German parliament. "We cannot just double the size of the Bundeswehr. How is
this going to work?" Marcel Dickow, a defence expert at the German Institute for
International and Security Affairs, makes a similar point: "The Bundeswehr
cannot spend that kind of money. It does not have the procedures in place and it
wouldn't even know what to spend it on."

With much of the defence budget fixed (more than 20 per cent is spent on rents
and pensions alone) the key variable is the portion set aside to buy weapons and
equipment. Yet staff shortages, inefficiencies and administrative bottlenecks
mean the defence ministry already struggles to spend its procurement budget in
full. Last year it was supposed to buy arms and equipment worth (EURO)5.9bn. In
the end, some (EURO)600m went unspent, despite glaring holes and shortfalls
across the entire military.

Part of the problem lies with the defence procurement office in Koblenz, a
notoriously slow-moving and understaffed body known as BAAINBw. On paper it has
6,500 staff but 1,100 of those posts are unfilled, putting a brake on procedures
and programmes. Critics say a deeper concern is its bureaucratic approach to
buying. It issues highly detailed specifications even for simple products such
as uniforms.

For more complex equipment, the list of official requirements can run to
thousands of pages. "The result is that we are not in a position to defend
ourselves properly because the things we need urgently we simply cannot acquire
urgently," said Christian Mölling, a defence expert at the German Council on
Foreign Relations.

Twenty-five years of budget cuts had left their mark on German defence
suppliers, he said. "Manufacturing sites have been closed, and many producers
have shifted towards a just-in-time model. That means that in some areas, the
supply chain for spare parts has broken down. With some military aircraft, for
example, spare parts are simply no longer being produced."

He added: "There are things that you cannot simply fix with more money."

Matters have grown so dire that several crucial weapons systems are barely
usable. According to the latest assessment by Mr Bartels' office, only 95 out of
255 Leopard II tanks were in service last year. Such shortfalls, moreover, often
have a direct impact on the Bundeswehr's ability to recruit and maintain staff.
"Planes are grounded so pilots don't get enough flying hours, which makes their
job less attractive and they leave. But it also makes it harder to train new
pilots. Everything is connected with everything," said Mr Bartels.

For much the same reason, defence experts see little point in pushing for a
quick spending spree. In many cases, the Bundeswehr does not even have the
technical staff to validate and certify new equipment for use.

"For every new A400M [transport aircraft] you need to hire and train a lot of
new people. You can't do that overnight. These are processes that take 15 or 20
years," said Mr Dickow.

Analysts agree a defence budget worth 2 per cent of GDP will remain little more
than a lofty ambition for years. But a gradual rise towards 1.5 per cent as
proposed by Ms von der Leyen strikes most as realistic and desirable.

"You don't have to spend 2 per cent of GDP on defence to meet the tasks the
Bundeswehr has set itself," said Mr Mölling. "But we do have to spend a lot more
than now, so let's start doing it."

'We cannot just double the size of the Bundeswehr. How is this going to work?'
Hans-Peter Bartels

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Frontline concerns: German troops with armoured vehicles during a
military exerciseValda Kalnina/EPA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              57 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

UK-wide 'backstop' stirs EU unease;
Brexit. Hard border ; Brussels negotiators fear London will carve up the single
market to its advantage

BYLINE: ALEX BARKER

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 616 words


Britain's emerging plan to avoid a hard border in Ireland is based on an idea
that has long made the EU's Brexit negotiators uneasy.

Applying the so-called "backstop" arrangement to the entire UK - rather than
just Northern Ireland - poses a double-edged challenge for the union's 27
remaining member states.

On the one hand the plan has appeal.

It can solve the border conundrum in Ireland while also providing continuity for
European business, in effect tying the UK to the EU's regime for customs and
goods beyond 2021.

"Some [leaders] will be tempted, no doubt," said one senior eurozone government
official working on Brexit.

But such a UK proposal would also directly contradict some core tenets of the
EU's Brexit strategy. At best the plan will be a hard sell in Brussels; at worst
EU negotiators say it could bring Brexit talks to crisis point.

According to Michel Barnier, the EU's chief negotiator, when it comes to the
backstop, "only Northern Ireland specific solutions will work".

EU leaders see Northern Ireland as a unique issue, with peace process
commitments that must be addressed in Britain's Article 50 exit treaty.

Lawyers in Brussels have, however, laid down strict limits on what can be
included in this exit treaty. It cannot be stretched, for instance, to the point
of defining lasting UK-EU trade arrangements. That would require a trade treaty,
negotiated after Brexit on a different legal basis.

British officials strongly dispute this assessment, saying Brussels has already
conceded the principle of a backstop including trade provisions. Even if EU
leaders took a flexible approach to the law - far from uncommon in Brussels -
there is a risk the European Parliament will veto any exit treaty, or challenge
its legality in court.

Brussels negotiators say a UK-wide backstop would allow London to carve up the
single market to its advantage. "This would be one huge cherry," said one senior
EU official.

Avoiding a hard border requires not just a customs union, but close regulatory
alignment, ranging from product standards to value added tax. If offered to the
UK as a whole, such trade terms would divide the "freedoms" of the single
market. London could avoid obligations, for instance, on the free movement of
people.

In private deliberations Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, has repeatedly
stressed that any Brexit deal must clearly show the consequences of leaving the
union.

For Berlin, the UK plan might look too much like carrying over the economic
benefits of membership. "Every populist in Europe would point and say, 'We want
that'," complained one northern European diplomat working on Brexit.

France is already wary of a backstop for Northern Ireland becoming an illicit
gateway into the single market. Extending it to the entire UK would amplify
these concerns.

Yet Paris's conditions - full acceptance of single market rules, regulators and
courts - would be anathema to British Eurosceptics. . A UK-wide backstop could
test the unity of the EU27. Some member states may be wary of a goods-dominated
backstop deal that does not cover their priorities in fisheries, or aviation.

Downing Street is confident any backstop would be time-limited, because the UK
would seek to reach a trade agreement to avoid a hard border in Ireland and
allow for "frictionless" EU trade.

But any UK attempt to include a formal cut-off date would also face strong
objections from the EU side.

Negotiators are considering ways to include review clauses, but Dublin and
Brussels say they could not compromise the guarantee provided by the backstop.
Editorial Comment page 10 Philip Stephens page 11

'Every populist in Europe would point and say, "We want that" ' Northern
European diplomat

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              58 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

May concedes on tie to customs union until Irish border resolved;
Backstop' agreed with cabinet ; ? Brussels voices doubts ; ? Eurosceptics
'caught on hop'

BYLINE: GEORGE PARKER ; LAURA HUGHES ; ALEX BARKER

SECTION: NEWS; FRONT PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 642 words


The whole of the UK will remain tied to a customs union with the EU after 2021
until an alternative to having a hard border in Ireland can be found, Theresa
May has conceded.

The prime minister agreed the plan on Tuesday with her cabinet ministers,
including Boris Johnson, one of the leaders of the Brexit campaign, according to
government officials. But Mrs May was accused by some Conservative MPs of
"bouncing" the cabinet into adopting the scheme, and others said they had been
kept in the dark.

Senior EU officials also expressed doubts over the UK approach, warning that it
diverged significantly from Brussels' preferred outcome. "If this is it, we will
have a crisis," said one senior EU diplomat directly involved in talks.

The proposal, to be presented to a European Council meeting next month, is Mrs
May's attempt to flesh out her "backstop" promise that there would not be a hard
border in Ireland after Brexit, even if trade talks fail.

Under her plan, the whole of the UK will be covered by the EU's common external
tariff, removing the need for a customs border in Ireland or between Ireland and
the UK mainland.

Mrs May, speaking at an EU summit in Sofia, suggested that the UK would still be
able to have its own "independent trade policy", though it will be unable to
negotiate different tariffs with countries that already have a deal with the EU.

EU officials have previously warned that the UK cannot use the desire to
maintain the status quo in Northern Ireland as a backdoor to a UK/EU trade deal
while circumventing the requirements of single-market membership. Mrs May's
allies played down the significance of the concession, saying they were
"confident" that Britain would sign a trade deal with the EU, including a new
customs arrangement to remove the need for a hard border in Ireland.

But Eurosceptics are less confident, not least because the cabinet has still not
agreed what sort of customs plan it prefers, and because Brussels dislikes all
the options that have been discussed so far. "There is no clear end date for
this," said Jacob Rees-Mogg, head of the pro-Brexit European Research Group.

"The more you push things down the road, the less anything ever happens. You
lose the impetus to do anything."

Downing Street did not say how it would address regulatory alignment. Unless
Northern Ireland remains part of the single market for goods, regulatory checks
will be needed at the Irish border.

Mr Johnson, the foreign secretary, and Michael Gove, the environment secretary,
signalled their opposition to the backstop proposal.

But one person briefed on the discussions said: "They were outnumbered. A few of
the ministers were caught on the hop by the whole thing. They did not see the
cabinet papers on this long before the discussion."

Eurosceptic Tory MPs yesterday demanded a briefing. "It's just one delay after
another and no one's telling us what's happening," said one.

The EU has warned that unless "substantial progress" is made on agreeing the
Irish backstop at next month's European Council, Brexit talks could stall. Leo
Varadkar, Ireland's prime minister, said: "The deadline of course for the
withdrawal agreement is October, but if we are not making real and substantial
progress by June then we need to seriously question whether we're going to have
a withdrawal agreement at all."

Mrs May has secured the backing of the Democratic Unionist party, which props up
her government.

It had opposed the EU's proposed backstop model, which would have put a new
border between Northern Ireland and the mainland.

One DUP official said: "For us importantly, the key differences on where this
proposal is at from previous ones is that it's UK-wide: there would be no border
in the Irish Sea. It is only about customs and is time limited." Backstop plan
stirs EU unease page 2 Editorial Comment page 10 Philip Stephens page 11

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Theresa May in conversation with Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel,
right, at the EU summit in Sofia yesterday Boris Grdanoski/AP

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              59 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

Berlin in quandary over how to spend more on military;
Germany's stretched armed forces expected to struggle with modest budget rise

BYLINE: TOBIAS BUCK

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 846 words


The German government is facing growing pressure at home and abroad to spend
more money on its armed forces.

In Berlin, however, officials and analysts have started to debate an altogether
different question: if the money is found, can it actually be put to use? Four
years ago Angela Merkel, the chancellor, signed up to a new Nato target
committing member countries to spend 2 per cent of gross domestic product on
defence. The call to raise military spending has gained additional urgency amid
a flurry of alarmist reports about gaps in staffing and equipment at the
Bundeswehr, or German army.

The government responded this week with a promise to raise the military budget
from 1.2 per cent of GDP last year to 1.5 per cent in 2025.

The increase would mean billions more euros to buy tanks, drones and aeroplanes
and to hire and train thousands of extra soldiers and civilian staff. But the
pledge would still leave Germany far off the 2 per cent mark and well below
levels in the US, Britain, France and other western countries.

Neither Ms Merkel nor Ursula von der Leyen, the defence minister, have dared to
call into question the Nato commitment. But defence experts warn that the
stretched armed forces will find it hard to absorb even modest increases
prom-ised now. Raising expenditure to 2 per cent of GDP is widely seen as
unrealistic even if the political will were there.

"Germany spent (EURO)37bn on defence last year. If we wanted to spend 2 per cent
of GDP on defence by 2024 that would mean almost doubling the budget to around
(EURO)72bn," said Hans-Peter Bartels, the armed forces commissioner of the
German parliament. "We cannot just double the size of the Bundeswehr. How is
this going to work?" Marcel Dickow, a defence expert at the German Institute for
International and Security Affairs, makes a similar point: "The Bundeswehr
cannot spend that kind of money. It does not have the procedures in place and it
wouldn't even know what to spend it on."

With much of the defence budget fixed (more than 20 per cent is spent on rents
and pensions alone) the key variable is the portion set aside to buy weapons and
equipment. Yet staff shortages, inefficiencies and administrative bottlenecks
mean the defence ministry already struggles to spend its procurement budget in
full. Last year it was supposed to buy arms and equipment worth (EURO)5.9bn. In
the end, some (EURO)600m went unspent, despite glaring holes and shortfalls
across the entire military.

Part of the problem lies with the defence procurement office in Koblenz, a
notoriously slow-moving and understaffed body known as BAAINBw. On paper it has
6,500 staff but 1,100 of those posts are unfilled, putting a brake on procedures
and programmes. Critics say a deeper concern is its bureaucratic approach to
buying. It issues highly detailed specifications even for simple products such
as uniforms.

For more complex equipment, the list of official requirements can run to
thousands of pages. "The result is that we are not in a position to defend
ourselves properly because the things we need urgently we simply cannot acquire
urgently," said Christian Mölling, a defence expert at the German Council on
Foreign Relations.

Twenty-five years of budget cuts had left their mark on German defence
suppliers, he said. "Manufacturing sites have been closed, and many producers
have shifted towards a just-in-time model. That means that in some areas, the
supply chain for spare parts has broken down. With some military aircraft, for
example, spare parts are simply no longer being produced."

He added: "There are things that you cannot simply fix with more money."

Matters have grown so dire that several crucial weapons systems are barely
usable. According to the latest assessment by Mr Bartels' office, only 95 out of
255 Leopard II tanks were in service last year. Such shortfalls, moreover, often
have a direct impact on the Bundeswehr's ability to recruit and maintain staff.
"Planes are grounded so pilots don't get enough flying hours, which makes their
job less attractive and they leave. But it also makes it harder to train new
pilots. Everything is connected with everything," said Mr Bartels.

For much the same reason, defence experts see little point in pushing for a
quick spending spree. In many cases, the Bundeswehr does not even have the
technical staff to validate and certify new equipment for use.

"For every new A400M [transport aircraft] you need to hire and train a lot of
new people. You can't do that overnight. These are processes that take 15 or 20
years," said Mr Dickow.

Analysts agree a defence budget worth 2 per cent of GDP will remain little more
than a lofty ambition for years. But a gradual rise towards 1.5 per cent as
proposed by Ms von der Leyen strikes most as realistic and desirable.

"You don't have to spend 2 per cent of GDP on defence to meet the tasks the
Bundeswehr has set itself," said Mr Mölling. "But we do have to spend a lot more
than now, so let's start doing it."

'We cannot just double the size of the Bundeswehr. How is this going to work?'
Hans-Peter Bartels

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Frontline concerns: German troops with armoured vehicles during a
military exerciseValda Kalnina/EPA

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              60 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                        The Independent - Daily Edition

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                 First Edition

Macron and Merkel insist on 'unlimited' exemption from Trump's steel tariffs

BYLINE: JON STONE EUROPE CORRESPONDENT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 594 words


The leaders of Germany and France have rounded on Donald Trump over planned
steel tariffs on EU producers, telling the US president to scrap his new policy
if he wants to negotiate better trade terms with Europe.

At a summit in Bulgaria the European leaders reiterated their common position
that they would be happy to address Mr Trump's complaints about the "unfair" way
US businesses are treated by the EU - but only if European steel producers are
permanently exempt from the new tariffs. In March, Mr Trump slapped 25 per cent
tariffs on steel imports and 10 per cent tariffs on foreign aluminium, but gave
the 28 EU countries a temporary exemption.

"It's Europe's economic sovereignty, and what we are demanding is that we are
exempted without conditions or time limits," said France's Emmanuel Macron, who
confirmed he was prepared to "improve things, in a peaceful setting" once the
tariffs had been cancelled. Germany's Angela Merkel added: "We have a common
position: we want an unlimited exemption, but are then prepared to talk about
how we can reciprocally reduce barriers for trade."

Speaking at the end of the Sofia summit Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of
the European Commission, said the EU would "not negotiate with the sword of
Damocles hanging over our head" as a "matter of dignity".

"I have to be very clear once again, and I repeat myself by saying it. We want
an unlimited exemption from the proposed tariff measures. If Europe obtains an
unlimited exemption from the proposed tariff measures we are ready to engage in
talks with our transatlantic partner," he said.

Mr Juncker said that if the tariffs were dropped the EU would be ready to
improve transatlantic energy cooperation on the trade of liquefied natural gas,
improve reciprocal market access for industrial products, and discuss reforms to
the World Trade Organisation. Mr Trump has already granted Canada and Mexico an
exemption from the tariffs on the basis that they will renegotiate the North
American Free Trade Agreement to be more favourable to the US.

The EU has threatened billions of dollars worth of countermeasures against US
products if it does not get its exemption. The row over steel tariffs is also
running parallel to discussions about how to deal with Mr Trump's withdrawal
from the Iran nuclear deal. EU leaders agreed yesterday to allow the European
Investment Bank to "facilitate" EU companies' investments in Iran to ensure
their continued economic viability. The European Commission also plans to unveil
measures to protect the continent's businesses hit by new US sanctions on Iran.

At the start of the Sofia summit Donald Tusk, the European Council president,
tore into Mr Trump, accusing him of being an unreliable ally and acting with
"capricious assertiveness". "Looking at the latest decisions of President Trump,
someone could even think: with friends like that, who needs enemies? But frankly
speaking, Europe should be grateful for President Trump because thanks to him we
have got rid of all illusions. He has made us realise that if you need a helping
hand, you will find one at the end of your arm," he said.

Mr Trump has complained about European trade policy, telling ITV in January: "We
cannot get our product in. It's very, very tough. And yet they send their
product to us - no taxes, very little taxes. It's very unfair. They're not the
only one, by the way. I could name many countries and places that do. But the
European Union has been very, very unfair to the United States. And I think it
will turn out to be very much to their detriment."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2018 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                              61 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                        The Independent - Daily Edition

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                 Second Edition

Nato members must pay their share, warns Trump

BYLINE: JEREMY B WHITE IN SAN FRANCISCO

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 594 words


Donald Trump singled out Germany in renewing his criticism of Nato members he
accuses of not contributing enough, saying laggards would be "dealt with".
Speaking alongside Nato's secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, at the White
House, Mr Trump reiterated a longstanding charge that America bears a
disproportionate share of supporting the military alliance's activities.

Germany "has not contributed what it should be contributing and it's a very big
beneficiary", said the president, who has long had a frosty relationship with
theGerman chancellor, Angela Merkel.

The president's world view is rooted in a belief that the US has consistently
been taken advantage of by international pacts and organisations - a scepticism
that fuels his unilaterally focused"America First" stance.

During the presidential campaign, he suggested America might onlydefend Nato
allies ifthey had "fulfilled their obligations to us".

Despite Mr Trump's wariness, Mr Stoltenberg praised the president for impelling
other nations to augment defence spending, saying "it is impacting allies
because now all allies are increasing defence spending".

The president echoed that comment by saying his relationship with Nato was
"really good".

"Together we've increased and really raised money from countries that werenot
paying or werenot paying a fair share,"Mr Trump said.

That show of solidarity notwithstanding, America's relations with some of its
most critical allies have come under strain in recent months as Mr Trump has
moved to fulfilcontroversial campaign promises.

Brushing off European leaders who urged him to reconsider, Mr Trump announced
earlier this month that he would be pulling America from a deal to stymie Iran's
nuclear weapons programme.

Mr Trump had long derided the pact for empowering America's chief rival in the
Middle East.

Europe and Iran have since sought to work together to salvage the deal,
suggesting that other world powers will veer off on a different path from the
Trump administration.

While representatives of Germany, France and the UK were meeting with Iranian
foreign minister Javad Zarif for what Mr Zarif heralded as a "good start" to
talks, the US Treasury Department was announcing a new round of sanctions
intended to crack down on Iranian sponsorship of armed proxies.

The EU president, Donald Tusk, referenced a broader realignment while issuing a
searing criticism of Mr Trump's foreign policy the day before, saying America
was acting with "capricious assertivness" and "got rid of all illusions" about
its divergent track from Europe.

In response, Mr Trump retorted that"the European Union has been terrible to the
United States on trade".

"They can call me all sorts of names,"Mr Trump said. Separately, Mr Trump's
decision to recognise Jerusalem as the capital of Israel has also met
international criticism.

The vast majority of other countries signed onto a UN resolution condemning the
decision after Mr Trump announced it last year, and the opening of an American
embassy in Jerusalem last week spurred fresh rebukes as thousands of
Palestinians were shot during protests.

As a planned meeting between Mr Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un draws
closer, Mr Trump has surrounded himself with advisers who have a record of
preferring assertive American actions to multilateralism.

His new national security adviser, John Bolton, is a stalwart Iraq war supporter
who has advocated military strikes on Iran and North Korea. His recently
confirmed secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, shares the president's support for
taking a hard line with Iran.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: IA


                      Copyright 2018 Independent Print Ltd
                              All Rights Reserved

                              62 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Sun (England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

CRAIC A SMILE, IRISH PM TOLD;
BREXIT HAGGLING ; May dig at gloomy Leo

BYLINE: TOM NEWTON DUNN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 174 words


THERESA May told Ireland's leader to cheer up yesterday as she tried to solve
the Brexit deadlock.

The PM confirmed the Cabinet had agreed a fall-back option to keep the Irish
border open.

Leo Varadkar had warned negotiations were at risk of collapse ahead of the talks
in Bulgarian capital Sofia.

But Mrs May - seen laughing with French president Emmanuel Macron and German
leader Angela Merkel before the meeting - told the Irish PM to be more
optimistic and wait for her plan.

A senior source said: "She told him to cheer up. Varadkar is talking to a
sceptical audience back home because he may have an election to worry about
soon."

Asked if the new plan meant she was climbing down to the EU, Mrs May insisted:
"No we are not. The United Kingdom will be leaving the Customs Union."

The backstop plan would see the UK uphold parts of the union for a limited
www.time.No new trade deals on goods could be made. Foreign Secretary Boris
Johnson put up firm opposition.

EU negotiator Michel Barnier said there had been no progress.

The Sun Says - Page Ten

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Face-off ... Varadkar

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SUN


                    Copyright 2018 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved

                              63 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Sun (England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

CRAIC A SMILE, IRISH PM TOLD;
BREXIT HAGGLING ; May dig at gloomy Leo

BYLINE: TOM NEWTON DUNN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 234 words


THERESA May told Ireland's leader to cheer up yesterday as she tried to solve
the Brexit deadlock.

The PM confirmed the Cabinet had agreed a fall-back option to keep the Irish
border open.

Leo Varadkar had warned negotiations were at risk of collapse ahead of the talks
in Bulgarian capital Sofia.

But Mrs May - seen joking with French president Emmanuel Macron and German
leader Angela Merkel before the meeting - told the Irish PM to be more
optimistic and wait for her plan. A source said: "She told him to cheer up.
Varadkar is talking to a sceptical audience back home because he may have an
election to worry about soon."

Asked if the new plan meant she was climbing down to the EU, Mrs May insisted:
"No we are not. The United Kingdom will be leaving the Customs Union."

Mr Varadkar said he was not discouraged by what Mrs May said and welcomed "any
move on customs that brings the UK closer to the EU".

He added: "But I very much emphasised that resolving the issue of avoiding a
hard border requires more than just customs. It would help solve some of the
problems related to the border but not all of them." The backstop plan would see
the UK uphold parts of the union for a limited www.time.No new trade deals on
goods could be made.

Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson strongly opposed the plan when it was discussed
by the committee on Tuesday.

EU negotiator Michel Barnier said there had been no progress.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Face-off ... Varadkar

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SUN


                    Copyright 2018 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved

                              64 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Sun (England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

THERESA'S BULGAR JOKE

BYLINE: ROBERT McAULAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 83 words


SUMMIT'S funny as Theresa May, French President Emmanuel Macron and German
Chancellor Angela Merkel share a joke at a meeting in Bulgaria.

The three leaders got the giggles before getting round the table for serious
talks in capital Sofia.

The PM also told Ireland's premier Leo Varadkar, below, to crack a smile as they
discussed Brexit.

A source said: "She told him to cheer up. Varadkar is talking to a sceptical
audience back home as he may have an election to worry about."

You Merk me laugh, Angela

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Three trade ... trio at summit

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SUN


                    Copyright 2018 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved

                              65 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Sun (England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 2;
                                    Scotland

MAY'S IN ON BULGAR JOKE

BYLINE: ROBERT McAULAY

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 83 words


SUMMIT'S funny as Theresa May, French President Emmanuel Macron and German
Chancellor Angela Merkel share a joke at a meeting in Bulgaria.

The three leaders got the giggles before getting round the table for serious
talks in capital Sofia.

The PM also told Ireland's premier Leo Varadkar, below, to crack a smile as they
discussed Brexit.

A source said: "She told him to cheer up. Varadkar is talking to a sceptical
audience back home as he may have an election to worry about."

You Merk me laugh, Angela

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Three trade ... trio at summit

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SUN


                    Copyright 2018 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved

                              66 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Sun (England)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                Northern Ireland

CRAIC A SMILE, IRISH PM TOLD;
BREXIT HAGGLING ; May dig at gloomy Leo

BYLINE: TOM NEWTON DUNN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 174 words


THERESA May told Ireland's leader to cheer up yesterday as she tried to solve
the Brexit deadlock.

The PM confirmed the Cabinet had agreed a fall-back option to keep the Irish
border open.

Leo Varadkar had warned negotiations were at risk of collapse ahead of the talks
in Bulgarian capital Sofia.

But Mrs May - seen laughing with French president Emmanuel Macron and German
leader Angela Merkel before the meeting - told the Irish PM to be more
optimistic and wait for her plan.

A senior source said: "She told him to cheer up. Varadkar is talking to a
sceptical audience back home because he may have an election to worry about
soon."

Asked if the new plan meant she was climbing down to the EU, Mrs May insisted:
"No we are not. The United Kingdom will be leaving the Customs Union."

The backstop plan would see the UK uphold parts of the union for a limited
www.time.No new trade deals on goods could be made. Foreign Secretary Boris
Johnson put up firm opposition.

EU negotiator Michel Barnier said there had been no progress.

The Sun Says - Page Ten

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Face-off ... Varadkar

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: SUN


                    Copyright 2018 NEWS GROUP NEWSPAPERS LTD
                              All Rights Reserved

                              67 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Danger for Nato

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 563 words


European leaders are beginning to think the unthinkable. They are starting to
take seriously warnings from Washington that the United States could so reduce
its role in Nato as to make the alliance meaningless unless Europe forks out
more for its own defence. If that were to happen, the Russian president would
surely perform a triumphant Cossack dance in Red Square. It would be a signal
that the West had not won the Cold War but splintered into incoherence.

The warnings could amount to little more than Trump administration bluster, an
attempt to lever America's allies into honouring their pledge to spend 2 per
cent of gross domestic product on defence and ease the financial burden on
Washington. A Nato summit looms in July and the president rightly wants the
Europeans to use the occasion to step up their contributions. Since President
Trump's withdrawal from the multilateral nuclear deal with Iran, however,
Europeans fear a broader American isolationism.

Plainly rattled, they are reaching for the wrong countermeasure. The answer to
American pressure is not to concoct a rival military bureaucracy.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said that Europe must develop its own
response to the security challenges ahead. Donald Tusk tweeted that Mr Trump's
actions, especially on Iran, have performed a useful task in stripping the
European Union of its illusions: "We realise that if you need a helping hand,
you will find one at the end of your own arm."

Mr Trump should indeed treat allies differently from his foes and rivals; his
brusque tone alienates public opinion in Europe and thwarts his own strategic
aims. A stern editorial in Der Spiegel, the German news magazine, calls for
"resistance against America". It concludes: "President Trump has adopted a tone
that ignores 70 years of trust."

Europe's response to the widening gulf with the US is, however, entirely
misjudged. A half-baked independent defence posture merely digs Nato's grave.
The point being made by the US in the run-up to the Nato summit is a familiar
one but is nonetheless true. The alliance has to be combat ready and properly
financed. That has been the essence of the alliance's posture not just
throughout the Cold War but also in the contemporary era, from its intervention
in the Balkans to today's cyberdefences. The Nato spending benchmark is supposed
to ensure that the West keeps up, modernises and deters.

When Germany manages to earmark only 1.22 per cent of GDP for defence, when it
grudgingly promises to raise that to 1.5 per cent by 2024, it makes a mockery of
alliance solidarity. Its leaders bemoan Mr Trump's actions on Iran, on trade
tariffs and on climate change yet continue to take it for granted that Germany
will have a privileged position under the American security umbrella despite
failing to maintain its own forces. Only five out of Germany's 16 A400M
transport planes were airworthy this winter. German jets fighting Isis could not
fly at night because their cockpit lights were too bright for pilots. Its fleet
of 93 Tornados cannot join Nato missions because of outdated equipment.

The defence of the West demands effort, sacrifice and political will. European
leaders should stop behaving as if the US administration is a hostile force.
They should not be in the business of forming a resistance front against their
prime security ally, the linchpin of Nato.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              68 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Trump makes western alliance great again;
For all the transatlantic bickering over defence spending, the US is resolved to
strengthen Nato

BYLINE: Edward Lucas

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 910 words


Europe and America cannot agree about anything. Except, that is, when it comes
to the future of the world's most important and successful military alliance.
Despite Donald Trump's erratic diplomacy and splenetic disdain for allies, the
prospects for the Nato summit in Brussels in mid-July are surprisingly
promising.

True, the gulf across the Atlantic will be on display, with theatrical public
rows about defence spending. Mr Trump will lambast the Europeans as cheapskate
freeloaders. Only a handful of the alliance's 29 members meet its defence
spending target of 2 per cent of GDP.

American taxpayers, in short, pick up the tab for the European welfare state.
Allies get most of the benefit from Nato, while Americans shoulder most of the
burden.

Amid worries about American unilateralism on Iran, the Middle East, climate
change and trade, European leaders are in no mood to be lectured. They too will
play to the gallery, decrying the Trump administration's arrogance and
recklessness.

Yet this much-derided administration, with strong congressional support, has
boosted, not cut, America's contribution to the Continent's security, splurging
money in eastern Europe and sending back the heavy armour that the Obama
administration withdrew. The US has beefed up its military ties with non-Nato
Sweden and Finland. Last month the Pentagon announced the restoration of the
Second Fleet, the US navy's North Atlantic command.

All this is thanks to Russia. By attacking Ukraine in 2014 and stepping up
mischief-making elsewhere, Vladimir Putin rebooted transatlanticism. Nato now
focuses on its core mission: territorial defence. The multinational tripwire
forces recently deployed in the Baltic republics and Poland have transformed the
security of these frontline states, while the danger of a Russian sneak attack
has receded. We are all safer as a result.

With the Baltic region largely sorted, attention is turning to the Balkans and
the Black Sea. One worry is Turkey, which is increasing its military
co-operation with Russia amid rows with the West over Syria. Instability and
Russian meddling in ex-Yugoslavia are bothersome. Hopes are growing that
Macedonia will finally get the chance to join the alliance but other candidates
such as Bosnia, Kosovo and Serbia are still distant prospects. Russian bluster
and threats have created a de facto veto on any further Nato expansion in the
Kremlin's former empire.

Nato is also grappling with the changing face of warfare: cyberattacks,
artificial intelligence, propaganda, targeted corruption and the like. Britain's
capabilities are in demand here and may even help us to secure a British
replacement for Jens Stoltenberg, who steps down as Nato secretary-general in
2020. Potential candidates are jostling, though no heavyweight is in sight.

The alliance's most pressing problems, though, are unglamorous ones, chiefly
logistics. These have decayed scandalously since the days of the Cold War.
Transporting tanks over Europe's congested rail network takes weeks. Paperwork
is burdensome.

This is changing, though not fast enough. The July summit will approve the
creation of a new Joint Support and Enabling Command in Ulm, Germany, to handle
transport, infrastructure, cybersecurity and other boring-but-important issues.
Spending money on dual-use facilities such as bigger ports, stronger bridges,
heavier rail wagons and better transhipment points offers Germany a chance to
sidestep American criticism about its defence spending, which is a measly 1.2
per cent of GDP. With an anti-American tide running strongly in Germany,
concentrating on logistics is an easier sell. Germans may fret that Nato is a
front for warmongering US weapons manufacturers. It is harder to argue against
better rail freight.

This approach will be far better than trying to bully Angela Merkel's government
into keeping its empty promise to meet the Nato 2 per cent target by 2024.
Indeed, given Germany's huge economy, such a spending splurge would make it the
Continent's military superpower, with potentially destabilising effects.

A second big issue is decisionmaking. Modern threats evolve rapidly and
confusingly. In the event of a Russian provocation, deliberations at the North
Atlantic council, Nato's decision-making body, could be too slow. From a
military perspective, the supreme allied commander in Europe, the American
general Curtis Scaparrotti, needs more authority - for example to deploy a
rapid-reaction force somewhere in eastern Europe at short notice. That treads on
sensitive toes: parliamentary consent for the use of armed force is
constitutionally entrenched in some countries, and enjoys strong political and
public support in others. American presidents are nervous about this too:
conflicts can start anywhere, but only the US can end them.

For all the fire, fog and fury in transatlantic relations, exemplified by Mr
Stoltenberg's hurriedly arranged peacekeeping mission to the White House
yesterday, the alliance's advantage is that it is the only game in town. It ties
Europe to the US. It ties Britain to Europe. It is Europe's only defence against
Russia. Nato's expansion increases security and promotes modernisation. It is
the only organisation that can deploy speedy, effective military force against
threats in north Africa, the Middle East and other foreign hotspots. Nothing
else comes close. On that, at least, everyone agrees.

Many Germans fret that Nato is a front for a warmongering US

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              69 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Moscow may use gas pipe to spy on West, US warns

BYLINE: David Charter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 358 words


America has warned that Moscow could use an $11 billion gas pipeline project
between Germany and Russia to spy in the Baltic Sea.

Sandra Oudkirk, deputy assistant secretary in the State Department, said that
the US was strongly opposed to the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. Washington warned
that the project to double the amount of Russian gas exported to Germany could
trigger a new set of sanctions.

The US believes that Moscow will be able to exert greater influence over Berlin
as well as cut about $1 billion a year in transit fees paid to Ukraine for
piping natural gas to Europe, and that dependence on the pipeline will weaken
the impact of western sanctions on Moscow. US officials are generally suspicious
of closer relations between Germany and Russia.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, will meet President Putin for the first
time this year at Sochi today for talks focused on preserving the Iran nuclear
deal. Relations between Germany and Russia have been cool since Russia annexed
Crimea in 2014.

The timing of the pipeline criticism seems designed to exert pressure when
President Trump's repudiation of the Iran deal is forcing Berlin and Moscow to
work together more closely. "We would be delighted if the project did not take
place," Ms Oudkirk, an energy policy expert, said in Berlin.

She claimed that the pipeline would divert gas flows away from Ukraine and could
become a pathway for Russia to install surveillance equipment in the Baltic Sea,
a sensitive military region.

The US has regarded the project as a strategic victory for Russia and is
suspicious of the appointment of Gerhard Schröder, the former chancellor, as
chairman of the pipeline board.

Jens Müller, a spokesman for Nord Stream 2, dismissed the concerns. He said that
the pipeline would be one of many sources of natural gas for Europe. "This
pipeline cannot be used to blackmail or negatively affect any country," he said.

Mrs Merkel has vowed to safeguard Ukraine's interests after a plea from
President Poroshenko. Peter Altmaier, the German economy minister, was sent to
Moscow and Kiev this week to secure a deal that would keep some gas flowing
through Ukraine.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              70 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

United Europe plots to bypass sanctions on Iran;
Iran

BYLINE: Catherine Philp

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22,23

LENGTH: 1257 words


European Union countries unanimously agreed to stick to the Iran nuclear deal
yesterday despite President Trump's withdrawal, ordering Brussels to devise
measures to limit the impact of US sanctions.

The pledge puts Europe on an economic collision course with the US as it seeks
to protect companies, institutions and trade with Iran from sanctions imposed by
Washington. Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said: "All European Union
member states still stand by this agreement." Donald Tusk, the European Council
president, said that all 28 member countries had pledged their commitment to the
agreement "as long as Iran remains fully committed to it".

They were speaking at the end of a two-day leaders' summit in Sofia, which was
originally called to discuss the situation in the western Balkans.

Mr Tusk said that the European Commission, the union's executive, was "given the
green light to be ready to act whenever European interests are affected".

President Macron of France said that his country was not trying to start a
larger trade war with the US over Iran but would try to protect its own
interests. "We're not going to choose one camp over another," he said. "We're
not going to be the allies of Iran against the United States of America."

The commission will draw up measures that could be taken to protect European
trade with Iran, covering nine key areas of concern identified by the British,
French and German foreign ministers in a meeting with their Iranian counterpart
this week. Iran says that it wants to stay in the agreement, which limits its
nuclear programme, but would leave if US sanctions cancelled out any economic
advantage of remaining.

Options under consideration include more EU investment in Iran via the European
Investment Bank, paying for Iranian oil in euros instead of dollars to avoid US
sanctions on dollar transactions, and legislation denying legal status to
secondary sanctions.

The legislation would probably include a European blocking resolution of the
kind used in the 1990s to mitigate the threat of sanctions related to Iran,
Libya and Cuba. That and a complaint against the US at the World Trade
Organisation had forced Washington to back down.

Mr Juncker said last night that work would begin on a blocking resolution today
to try to get it in place before August 6, the 90-day deadline when sanctions
would be reimposed. There is considerable doubt, however, over whether such a
compromise would be possible with an administration apparently so oblivious to
its allies' concerns. Mrs Merkel also questioned the feasibility of indemnifying
European companies affected by the sanctions. Last week the US ambassador to
Berlin ordered German companies to start winding up their business in Iran. Mrs
Merkel said that although it might be possible to give relief to smaller and
medium-size companies, doing so across the board would be harder. "We cannot and
must not create illusions," she warned.

It remains to be seen whether Brussels will be swift enough to steady commercial
nerves. The French oil company Total has said that it will not continue a
billion-dollar project in Iran unless it is granted a waiver by Washington. It
said that it "cannot afford to be exposed to any secondary sanctions", including
the loss of financing by American banks. The insurance group Allianz and the
shipping company Maersk are also closing their operations.

In contrast, Iranian state television reported that Iran had just signed an
agreement with a British consortium to develop an oilfield, the first with a US
ally since Mr Trump's decision. Colin Rowley, the managing director of Pergas
International Consortium, and Bijan Alipour, managing director of the National
Iranian South Oil Company, signed a preliminary deed on the partnership on
Wednesday night.

If a contract is signed, more than $1 billion will be spent to produce 200,000
barrels of crude oil a day over the next decade in the 55-year old Karanj
oilfield, up from 12,000 barrels a day. Pergas seems to do little business in
the US, potentially giving it more freedom to operate in Iran.

Mr Macron kicked off the day's talks in Sofia with a call for European unity,
saying that it had become the only guarantor of global stability. "When
challenges threaten to destabilise the world, the only solution is to join our
forces to respond in one voice," he said. "European sovereignty is the guarantor
of international stability."

Mr Tusk delivered a sharp rebuke to the US president before the summit. "Looking
at the latest decisions of Donald Trump someone could even think: with friends
like that who needs enemies," Mr Tusk wrote in a letter to leaders. "But
frankly, the EU should be grateful. Thanks to him we got rid of all illusions.
We realised that if you need a helping hand, you will find one at the end of
your arm."

Analysis

Europe's struggle to save the Iran nuclear deal from collapse may be its most
pressing diplomatic and security challenge. But the US decision to pull out of
the agreement, imperilling its very survival, has far wider ramifications
(Catherine Philp writes).

After more than a year of slights, threats and discord, over issues from defence
spending to trade to the threat from climate change, President Trump made clear
his contempt for his European allies and the rules-based international order
when he announced his withdrawal from the Iran nuclear agreement.

The deal was born in Europe after the 2003 Iraq War, when Britain, France and
Germany took on the task of addressing Iran's nuclear ambitions. European unity
was shaken by the continent's split over the Iraq invasion but its three biggest
powers came together only months later to begin the often painful 12-year
journey towards the Iran nuclear deal.

Having withdrawn, Mr Trump has not only spurned multilateral diplomacy but has
put the US in material breach of an international agreement enshrined in a
unanimous UN security council resolution. Not content with that, he is
threatening to punish Europe by imposing sanctions on its companies and
institutions doing business with Iran.

It was, Donald Tusk noted, a reality check months in the coming. Mr Trump should
be thanked for puncturing Europe's illusion that it could rely on the US and
showing that it must act alone and united.

So far unity is holding. On the issues that most divide Europe and the US,
European states have remained remarkably in step, with each other and with the
postwar global order. What is unclear is how they can maintain the latter in the
absence of American leadership or even co-operation.

Pax Americana faltered under George W Bush's unilateralism and overreach, only
to be compounded by Barack Obama's attempted corrective, an American retreat. Mr
Trump's "capricious assertiveness," in Mr Tusk's words, economic nationalism and
disregard for the norms of diplomacy mean that Europe also finds the US actively
undermining it on issues from climate change to Iran.

This is perhaps most of a shock to Britain as it prepares for Brexit, a divorce
it had wrongly believed would mean it could move closer to the US in a
re-energised special www.relationship.No one benefits more from Europe's
fracture with the US than Russia, which longs for the demise of Nato and the
shattering of western unity. That is why European leaders cannot afford wholly
to turn their backs on the transatlantic alliance.

Europe has no other superpower with which it can ally if Russia grows more
aggressive - and it still depends on transatlantic trade, one of the engines of
the global economy.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: President Macron, Theresa May andLUDOVIC MARIN/AFP/GETTYChancellor
Merkel met in Sofia, where they affirmed their commitment to the Iran nuclear
deal despite the US pulling out

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              71 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Moscow may use gas pipe to spy on West, US warns

BYLINE: David Charter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 358 words


America has warned that Moscow could use an $11 billion gas pipeline project
between Germany and Russia to spy in the Baltic Sea.

Sandra Oudkirk, deputy assistant secretary in the State Department, said that
the US was strongly opposed to the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. Washington warned
that the project to double the amount of Russian gas exported to Germany could
trigger a new set of sanctions.

The US believes that Moscow will be able to exert greater influence over Berlin
as well as cut about $1 billion a year in transit fees paid to Ukraine for
piping natural gas to Europe, and that dependence on the pipeline will weaken
the impact of western sanctions on Moscow. US officials are generally suspicious
of closer relations between Germany and Russia.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, will meet President Putin for the first
time this year at Sochi today for talks focused on preserving the Iran nuclear
deal. Relations between Germany and Russia have been cool since Russia annexed
Crimea in 2014.

The timing of the pipeline criticism seems designed to exert pressure when
President Trump's repudiation of the Iran deal is forcing Berlin and Moscow to
work together more closely. "We would be delighted if the project did not take
place," Ms Oudkirk, an energy policy expert, said in Berlin.

She claimed that the pipeline would divert gas flows away from Ukraine and could
become a pathway for Russia to install surveillance equipment in the Baltic Sea,
a sensitive military region.

The US has regarded the project as a strategic victory for Russia and is
suspicious of the appointment of Gerhard Schröder, the former chancellor, as
chairman of the pipeline board.

Jens Müller, a spokesman for Nord Stream 2, dismissed the concerns. He said that
the pipeline would be one of many sources of natural gas for Europe. "This
pipeline cannot be used to blackmail or negatively affect any country," he said.

Mrs Merkel has vowed to safeguard Ukraine's interests after a plea from
President Poroshenko. Peter Altmaier, the German economy minister, was sent to
Moscow and Kiev this week to secure a deal that would keep some gas flowing
through Ukraine.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              72 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

United Europe plots to bypass sanctions on Iran;
Iran

BYLINE: Catherine Philp

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30,31

LENGTH: 1257 words


European Union countries unanimously agreed to stick to the Iran nuclear deal
yesterday despite President Trump's withdrawal, ordering Brussels to devise
measures to limit the impact of US sanctions.

The pledge puts Europe on an economic collision course with the US as it seeks
to protect companies, institutions and trade with Iran from sanctions imposed by
Washington. Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said: "All European Union
member states still stand by this agreement." Donald Tusk, the European Council
president, said that all 28 member countries had pledged their commitment to the
agreement "as long as Iran remains fully committed to it".

They were speaking at the end of a two-day leaders' summit in Sofia, which was
originally called to discuss the situation in the western Balkans.

Mr Tusk said that the European Commission, the union's executive, was "given the
green light to be ready to act whenever European interests are affected".

President Macron of France said that his country was not trying to start a
larger trade war with the US over Iran but would try to protect its own
interests. "We're not going to choose one camp over another," he said. "We're
not going to be the allies of Iran against the United States of America."

The commission will draw up measures that could be taken to protect European
trade with Iran, covering nine key areas of concern identified by the British,
French and German foreign ministers in a meeting with their Iranian counterpart
this week. Iran says that it wants to stay in the agreement, which limits its
nuclear programme, but would leave if US sanctions cancelled out any economic
advantage of remaining.

Options under consideration include more EU investment in Iran via the European
Investment Bank, paying for Iranian oil in euros instead of dollars to avoid US
sanctions on dollar transactions, and legislation denying legal status to
secondary sanctions.

The legislation would probably include a European blocking resolution of the
kind used in the 1990s to mitigate the threat of sanctions related to Iran,
Libya and Cuba. That and a complaint against the US at the World Trade
Organisation had forced Washington to back down.

Mr Juncker said last night that work would begin on a blocking resolution today
to try to get it in place before August 6, the 90-day deadline when sanctions
would be reimposed. There is considerable doubt, however, over whether such a
compromise would be possible with an administration apparently so oblivious to
its allies' concerns. Mrs Merkel also questioned the feasibility of indemnifying
European companies affected by the sanctions. Last week the US ambassador to
Berlin ordered German companies to start winding up their business in Iran. Mrs
Merkel said that although it might be possible to give relief to smaller and
medium-size companies, doing so across the board would be harder. "We cannot and
must not create illusions," she warned.

It remains to be seen whether Brussels will be swift enough to steady commercial
nerves. The French oil company Total has said that it will not continue a
billion-dollar project in Iran unless it is granted a waiver by Washington. It
said that it "cannot afford to be exposed to any secondary sanctions", including
the loss of financing by American banks. The insurance group Allianz and the
shipping company Maersk are also closing their operations.

In contrast, Iranian state television reported that Iran had just signed an
agreement with a British consortium to develop an oilfield, the first with a US
ally since Mr Trump's decision. Colin Rowley, the managing director of Pergas
International Consortium, and Bijan Alipour, managing director of the National
Iranian South Oil Company, signed a preliminary deed on the partnership on
Wednesday night.

If a contract is signed, more than $1 billion will be spent to produce 200,000
barrels of crude oil a day over the next decade in the 55-year old Karanj
oilfield, up from 12,000 barrels a day. Pergas seems to do little business in
the US, potentially giving it more freedom to operate in Iran.

Mr Macron kicked off the day's talks in Sofia with a call for European unity,
saying that it had become the only guarantor of global stability. "When
challenges threaten to destabilise the world, the only solution is to join our
forces to respond in one voice," he said. "European sovereignty is the guarantor
of international stability."

Mr Tusk delivered a sharp rebuke to the US president before the summit. "Looking
at the latest decisions of Donald Trump someone could even think: with friends
like that who needs enemies," Mr Tusk wrote in a letter to leaders. "But
frankly, the EU should be grateful. Thanks to him we got rid of all illusions.
We realised that if you need a helping hand, you will find one at the end of
your arm."

Analysis

Europe's struggle to save the Iran nuclear deal from collapse may be its most
pressing diplomatic and security challenge. But the US decision to pull out of
the agreement, imperilling its very survival, has far wider ramifications
(Catherine Philp writes).

After more than a year of slights, threats and discord, over issues from defence
spending to trade to the threat from climate change, President Trump made clear
his contempt for his European allies and the rules-based international order
when he announced his withdrawal from the Iran nuclear agreement.

The deal was born in Europe after the 2003 Iraq War, when Britain, France and
Germany took on the task of addressing Iran's nuclear ambitions. European unity
was shaken by the continent's split over the Iraq invasion but its three biggest
powers came together only months later to begin the often painful 12-year
journey towards the Iran nuclear deal.

Having withdrawn, Mr Trump has not only spurned multilateral diplomacy but has
put the US in material breach of an international agreement enshrined in a
unanimous UN security council resolution. Not content with that, he is
threatening to punish Europe by imposing sanctions on its companies and
institutions doing business with Iran.

It was, Donald Tusk noted, a reality check months in the coming. Mr Trump should
be thanked for puncturing Europe's illusion that it could rely on the US and
showing that it must act alone and united.

So far unity is holding. On the issues that most divide Europe and the US,
European states have remained remarkably in step, with each other and with the
postwar global order. What is unclear is how they can maintain the latter in the
absence of American leadership or even co-operation.

Pax Americana faltered under George W Bush's unilateralism and overreach, only
to be compounded by Barack Obama's attempted corrective, an American retreat. Mr
Trump's "capricious assertiveness," in Mr Tusk's words, economic nationalism and
disregard for the norms of diplomacy mean that Europe also finds the US actively
undermining it on issues from climate change to Iran.

This is perhaps most of a shock to Britain as it prepares for Brexit, a divorce
it had wrongly believed would mean it could move closer to the US in a
re-energised special www.relationship.No one benefits more from Europe's
fracture with the US than Russia, which longs for the demise of Nato and the
shattering of western unity. That is why European leaders cannot afford wholly
to turn their backs on the transatlantic alliance.

Europe has no other superpower with which it can ally if Russia grows more
aggressive - and it still depends on transatlantic trade, one of the engines of
the global economy.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: President Macron, Theresa May andLUDOVIC MARIN/AFP/GETTYChancellor
Merkel met in Sofia, where they affirmed their commitment to the Iran nuclear
deal despite the US pulling out

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              73 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Trump makes western alliance great again;
For all the transatlantic bickering over defence spending, the United States is
determined to strengthen Nato

BYLINE: Edward Lucas

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 933 words


Europe and America cannot agree about anything. Except, that is, when it comes
to the future of the world's most important and successful military alliance.
Despite Donald Trump's erratic diplomacy and splenetic disdain for allies, the
prospects for the Nato summit in Brussels in mid-July are surprisingly
promising.

True, the gulf across the Atlantic will be on display, with theatrical public
rows about defence spending. Mr Trump will lambast the Europeans as cheapskate
freeloaders. Only a handful of the alliance's 29 members meet its defence
spending target of 2 per cent of GDP.

American taxpayers, in short, pick up the tab for the European welfare state.
Allies get most of the benefit from Nato, while Americans shoulder most of the
burden.

Amid worries about American unilateralism on Iran, the Middle East, climate
change and trade, European leaders are in no mood to be lectured. They too will
play to the gallery, decrying the Trump administration's arrogance and
recklessness.

Yet this much-derided administration, with strong congressional support, has
boosted, not cut, America's contribution to the Continent's security, splurging
money in eastern Europe and sending back the heavy armour that the Obama
administration withdrew. The US has beefed up its military ties with non-Nato
Sweden and Finland. Last month the Pentagon announced the restoration of the
Second Fleet, the US navy's North Atlantic command.

All this is thanks to Russia. By attacking Ukraine in 2014 and stepping up
mischief-making elsewhere, Vladimir Putin rebooted transatlanticism. Nato now
focuses on its core mission: territorial defence. The multinational tripwire
forces recently deployed in the Baltic republics and Poland have transformed the
security of these frontline states, while the danger of a Russian sneak attack
has receded. We are all safer as a result.

With the Baltic region largely sorted, attention is turning to the Balkans and
the Black Sea. One worry is Turkey, which is increasing its military
co-operation with Russia amid rows with the West over Syria. Instability and
Russian meddling in ex-Yugoslavia are bothersome. Hopes are growing that
Macedonia will finally get the chance to join the alliance but other candidates
such as Bosnia, Kosovo and Serbia are still distant prospects. Russian bluster
and threats have created a de facto veto on any further Nato expansion in the
Kremlin's former empire.

Nato is also grappling with the changing face of warfare: cyberattacks,
artificial intelligence, propaganda, targeted corruption and the like. Britain's
capabilities are in demand here and they may even help us to secure a British
replacement for Jens Stoltenberg, who steps down as Nato secretarygeneral in
2020. Potential candidates are jostling, though no heavyweight is in sight.
(David Cameron would like the job but Brexit-bruised EU countries regard him
with loathing.) The alliance's most pressing problems, though, are unglamorous
ones, chiefly logistics. These have decayed scandalously since the days of the
Cold War. Transporting tanks over Europe's congested rail network takes weeks,
when it should take days or hours. Paperwork is burdensome.

This is changing, though not fast enough. The July summit will approve the
creation of a new Joint Support and Enabling Command in Ulm, Germany, to handle
transport, infrastructure, cybersecurity and other boring-but-important issues.
Spending money on dual-use facilities such as bigger ports, stronger bridges,
heavier rail wagons and better transhipment points offers Germany a chance to
sidestep American criticism about its defence spending, which is a measly 1.2
per cent of GDP. With an anti-American tide running strongly in Germany,
concentrating on logistics is an easier sell. Germans may fret that Nato is a
front for warmongering US weapons manufacturers. It is harder to argue against
better rail freight.

This approach will be far better than trying to bully Angela Merkel's government
into keeping its empty promise to meet the Nato 2 per cent target by 2024.
Indeed, given Germany's huge economy, such a spending splurge would make it the
Continent's military superpower, with potentially destabilising effects.

A second big issue is decisionmaking. Modern threats evolve rapidly and
confusingly. In the event of a Russian provocation, deliberations at the North
Atlantic council, Nato's decision-making body, could be too slow. From a
military perspective, the supreme allied commander in Europe, the American
general Curtis Scaparrotti, needs more authority - for example to deploy a
rapid-reaction force somewhere in eastern Europe at short notice. That treads on
sensitive toes: parliamentary consent for the use of armed force is
constitutionally entrenched in some countries, and enjoys strong political and
public support in others. American presidents are nervous about this too:
conflicts can start anywhere, but only the US can end them.

For all the fire, fog and fury in transatlantic relations, exemplified by Mr
Stoltenberg's hurriedly arranged peacekeeping mission to the White House
yesterday, the alliance's great advantage is that it is the only game in town.
It ties Europe to the US. It ties Britain to Europe. It is Europe's only defence
against Russia. Nato's expansion increases security and promotes modernisation.
It is the only organisation that can deploy speedy, effective military force
against threats in north Africa, the Middle East and other foreign hotspots.
Nothing else comes close. On that, at least, everyone agrees.

Many Germans fret that Nato is a front for a warmongering US

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              74 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Danger for Nato;
European states should spend more on their defence to win the trust of the US

SECTION: LETTERS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 563 words


European leaders are beginning to think the unthinkable. They are starting to
take seriously warnings from Washington that the United States could so reduce
its role in Nato as to make the alliance meaningless unless Europe forks out
more for its own defence. If that were to happen, the Russian president would
surely perform a triumphant Cossack dance in Red Square. It would be a signal
that the West had not won the Cold War but splintered into incoherence.

The warnings could amount to little more than Trump administration bluster, an
attempt to lever America's allies into honouring their pledge to spend 2 per
cent of gross domestic product on defence and ease the financial burden on
Washington. A Nato summit looms in July and the president rightly wants the
Europeans to use the occasion to step up their contributions. Since President
Trump's withdrawal from the multilateral nuclear deal with Iran, however,
Europeans fear a broader American isolationism.

Plainly rattled, they are reaching for the wrong countermeasure. The answer to
American pressure is not to concoct a rival military bureaucracy.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said that Europe must develop its own
response to the security challenges ahead. Donald Tusk tweeted that Mr Trump's
actions, especially on Iran, have performed a useful task in stripping the
European Union of its illusions: "We realise that if you need a helping hand,
you will find one at the end of your own arm."

Mr Trump should indeed treat allies differently from his foes and rivals; his
brusque tone alienates public opinion in Europe and thwarts his own strategic
aims. A stern editorial in Der Spiegel, the German news magazine, calls for
"resistance against America". It concludes: "President Trump has adopted a tone
that ignores 70 years of trust."

Europe's response to the widening gulf with the US is, however, entirely
misjudged. A half-baked independent defence posture merely digs Nato's grave.
The point being made by the US in the run-up to the Nato summit is a familiar
one but is nonetheless true. The alliance has to be combat ready and properly
financed. That has been the essence of the alliance's posture not just
throughout the Cold War but also in the contemporary era, from its intervention
in the Balkans to today's cyberdefences. The Nato spending benchmark is supposed
to ensure that the West keeps up, modernises and deters.

When Germany manages to earmark only 1.22 per cent of GDP for defence, when it
grudgingly promises to raise that to 1.5 per cent by 2024, it makes a mockery of
alliance solidarity. Its leaders bemoan Mr Trump's actions on Iran, on trade
tariffs and on climate change yet continue to take it for granted that Germany
will have a privileged position under the American security umbrella despite
failing to maintain its own forces. Only five out of Germany's 16 A400M
transport planes were airworthy this winter. German jets fighting Isis could not
fly at night because their cockpit lights were too bright for pilots. Its fleet
of 93 Tornados cannot join Nato missions because of outdated equipment.

The defence of the West demands effort, sacrifice and political will. European
leaders should stop behaving as if the US administration is a hostile force.
They should not be in the business of forming a resistance front against their
prime security ally, the linchpin of Nato.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              75 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

United Europe plots to bypass sanctions on Iran

BYLINE: Catherine Philp

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30,31

LENGTH: 1241 words


The European Union will begin work today on legislation to block US sanctions on
companies doing business with Iran.

The decision came after member states agreed unanimously to stick to the Iran
nuclear deal after President Trump's withdrawal.

The European Commission will start reactivating a so-called blocking statute
against extra-territorial sanctions after members states gave it the "green
light to be ready to act whenever European interests are affected". The statute,
never tested in a court, was written in 1996 to block US sanctions from applying
to European companies.

The move puts Europe on an economic collision course with the US as it seeks to
protect companies, institutions and trade with Iran from the sanctions that will
come into effect in August.

It came as major European companies began withdrawing from doing business with
Iran for fear of becoming ensnared in sanctions, effectively forcing them to
choose between trade with the US and Iran. The US Treasury Department put them
on notice that they had 90 days to wrap up most business before the renewed
sanctions take effect.

Iran has called on European leaders to provide "guarantees" that the economic
benefits from the deal will continue to flow, warning that it may start
enriching uranium again if it no longer stands to gain economically from
continuing in the agreement.

European leaders met in Sofia yesterday for a summit to address the situation in
the western Balkans. The meeting was swiftly hijacked by the crisis over the
Iran deal and the widening rift between Europe and the US on that and other
critical global issues. A unanimous commitment was voiced to honour the deal.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said: "All European Union member states
still stand by this agreement." Donald Tusk, the European Council president,
said that all 28 member countries had pledged their commitment to the agreement
"as long as Iran remains fully committed to it".

Jean-Claude Juncker, the European Commission president, said that EU leaders had
also decided to allow the European Investment Bank to facilitate European
companies' investment in Iran. Another move would be to enable Iranian oil to be
bought in euros instead of dollars to avoid US sanctions on dollar transactions.

There is considerable doubt, however, over whether the resolution would work in
protecting trade with Iran. The last time it was employed was in response to US
sanctions on Cuba, Libya and Iran, along with a complaint to the World Trade
Organisation. The stand-off was resolved only when Washington backed off but Mr
Trump has shown little appetite for such a compromise.

Anahita Thomas, a trade partner with Baker Mckenzie, a law firm, said that the
resolution could put companies "between a rock and a hard place". It was
unlikely to be effective because the issue was less legal than commercial. She
added: "Businesses ask themselves: is it worth choosing perhaps lucrative but
small opportunities in Iran over doing business in the US market? The answer is
clearly no. A legal tool cannot overcome this challenge."

President Macron of France insisted that Europe was not trying to start a larger
trade war with the US over Iran. "We're not going to choose one camp over
another," he said. "We're not going to be the allies of Iran against the United
States of America."

He added that he would not pressure French companies to remain in Iran. "The
president of France is not the CEO of Total," he said, referring to the French
oil company which has said that it will not continue a billion-dollar project in
Iran unless it is granted a waiver by Washington.

Iranian state television reported, however, that the country had signed an
agreement with a British consortium to develop an oilfield, the first with a US
ally since Mr Trump's decision.

Colin Rowley, the managing director of Pergas International Consortium, and
Bijan Allipour, managing director of the National Iranian South Oil Company,
signed a preliminary deed on the partnership on Wednesday night.

Mr Macron began the talks in Sofia with a call for European unity, saying that
it had become the only guarantor of global stability. "When challenges threaten
to destabilise the world, the only solution is to join our forces to respond in
one voice," he said. "European sovereignty is the guarantor of international
stability."

Mr Tusk delivered a sharp rebuke to the US president before the summit. "Looking
at the latest decisions of Donald Trump someone could even think: with friends
like that who needs enemies," he wrote in a letter to leaders. "The EU should be
grateful. Thanks to him we got rid of all illusions. We realised that if you
need a helping hand, you will find one at the end of your arm."

Analysis Europe's struggle to save the Iran nuclear deal from collapse may be
its most pressing diplomatic and security challenge. But the US decision to pull
out of the agreement, imperilling its very survival, has far wider ramifications
(Catherine Philp writes).

After more than a year of slights, threats and discord over issues from defence
spending to trade to the threat from climate change, President Trump made clear
his contempt for his European allies and the rules-based international order
when he announced his withdrawal from the Iran nuclear agreement.

The deal was born in Europe after the 2003 Iraq War, when Britain, France and
Germany took on the task of addressing Iran's nuclear ambitions. European unity
was shaken by the continent's split over the Iraq invasion but its three biggest
powers came together only months later to begin the often painful 12-year
journey towards the Iran nuclear deal.

Having withdrawn, Mr Trump has not only spurned multilateral diplomacy but has
put the US in material breach of an international agreement enshrined in a
unanimous UN security council resolution. Not content with that, he is
threatening to punish Europe by imposing sanctions on its companies and
institutions doing business with Iran.

It was, Donald Tusk noted, a reality check months in the coming. Mr Trump should
be thanked for puncturing Europe's illusion that it could rely on the US, and
showing that it must act alone and united.

So far unity is holding. On the issues that most divide Europe and the US,
European states have remained remarkably in step, with each other and with the
postwar global order. What is unclear is how they can maintain the latter in the
absence of American leadership or even co-operation.

Pax Americana faltered under George W Bush's unilateralism and overreach, only
to be compounded by Barack Obama's attempted corrective, an American retreat. Mr
Trump's "capricious assertiveness," in Mr Tusk's words, economic nationalism and
disregard for the norms of diplomacy mean that Europe also finds the US actively
undermining it on issues from climate change to Iran.

This is perhaps most of a shock to Britain as it prepares for Brexit, a divorce
it had wrongly believed would mean it could move closer to the US in a
re-energised special www.relationship.No one benefits more from Europe's
fracture with the US than Russia, which longs for the demise of Nato and the
shattering of western unity. That is why European leaders cannot afford wholly
to turn their backs on the transatlantic alliance.

Europe has no other superpower with which it can ally if Russia grows more
aggressive - and it still depends on transatlantic trade, one of the engines of
the global economy.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: President Macron, Theresa May andLUDOVIC MARIN/AFP/GETTYAngela Merkel
met in Sofia, where they affirmed their commitment to the Iran nuclear deal
despite the US pulling out

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              76 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Challenging Nato;
European states should spend more on their defence to win the trust of the US

SECTION: LETTERS; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 563 words


European leaders are beginning to think the unthinkable. They are starting to
take seriously warnings from Washington that the United States could so reduce
its role in Nato as to make the alliance meaningless unless Europe forks out
more for its own defence. If that were to happen, the Russian president would
surely perform a triumphant Cossack dance in Red Square. It would be a signal
that the West had not won the Cold War but splintered into incoherence.

The warnings could amount to little more than Trump administration bluster, an
attempt to lever America's allies into honouring their pledge to spend 2 per
cent of gross domestic product on defence and ease the financial burden on
Washington. A Nato summit looms in July and the president rightly wants the
Europeans to use the occasion to step up their contributions. Since President
Trump's withdrawal from the multilateral nuclear deal with Iran, however,
Europeans fear a broader American isolationism.

Plainly rattled, they are reaching for the wrong countermeasure. The answer to
American pressure is not to concoct a rival military bureaucracy.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said that Europe must develop its own
response to the security challenges ahead. Donald Tusk tweeted that Mr Trump's
actions, especially on Iran, have performed a useful task in stripping the
European Union of its illusions: "We realise that if you need a helping hand,
you will find one at the end of your own arm."

Mr Trump should indeed treat allies differently from his foes and rivals; his
brusque tone alienates public opinion in Europe and thwarts his own strategic
aims. A stern editorial in Der Spiegel, the German news magazine, calls for
"resistance against America". It concludes: "President Trump has adopted a tone
that ignores 70 years of trust."

Europe's response to the widening gulf with the US is, however, entirely
misjudged. A half-baked independent defence posture merely digs Nato's grave.
The point being made by the US in the run-up to the Nato summit is a familiar
one but is nonetheless true. The alliance has to be combat ready and properly
financed. That has been the essence of the alliance's posture not just
throughout the Cold War but also in the contemporary era, from its intervention
in the Balkans to today's cyberdefences. The Nato spending benchmark is supposed
to ensure that the West keeps up, modernises and deters.

When Germany manages to earmark only 1.22 per cent of GDP for defence, when it
grudgingly promises to raise that to 1.5 per cent by 2024, it makes a mockery of
alliance solidarity. Its leaders bemoan Mr Trump's actions on Iran, on trade
tariffs and on climate change yet continue to take it for granted that Germany
will have a privileged position under the American security umbrella despite
failing to maintain its own forces. Only five out of Germany's 16 A400M
transport planes were airworthy this winter. German jets fighting Isis could not
fly at night because their cockpit lights were too bright for pilots. Its fleet
of 93 Tornados cannot join Nato missions because of outdated equipment.

The defence of the West demands effort, sacrifice and political will. European
leaders should stop behaving as if the US administration is a hostile force.
They should not be in the business of forming a resistance front against their
prime security ally, the linchpin of Nato.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              77 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

United Europe plots to bypass sanctions on Iran

BYLINE: Catherine Philp

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 32,33

LENGTH: 1257 words


European Union countries unanimously agreed to stick to the Iran nuclear deal
yesterday despite President Trump's withdrawal, ordering Brussels to devise
measures to limit the impact of US sanctions.

The pledge puts Europe on an economic collision course with the US as it seeks
to protect companies, institutions and trade with Iran from sanctions imposed by
Washington. Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said: "All European Union
member states still stand by this agreement." Donald Tusk, the European Council
president, said that all 28 member countries had pledged their commitment to the
agreement "as long as Iran remains fully committed to it".

They were speaking at the end of a two-day leaders' summit in Sofia, which was
originally called to discuss the situation in the western Balkans.

Mr Tusk said that the European Commission, the union's executive, was "given the
green light to be ready to act whenever European interests are affected".

President Macron of France said that his country was not trying to start a
larger trade war with the US over Iran but would try to protect its own
interests. "We're not going to choose one camp over another," he said. "We're
not going to be the allies of Iran against the United States of America."

The commission will draw up measures that could be taken to protect European
trade with Iran, covering nine key areas of concern identified by the British,
French and German foreign ministers in a meeting with their Iranian counterpart
this week. Iran says that it wants to stay in the agreement, which limits its
nuclear programme, but would leave if US sanctions cancelled out any economic
advantage of remaining.

Options under consideration include more EU investment in Iran via the European
Investment Bank, paying for Iranian oil in euros instead of dollars to avoid US
sanctions on dollar transactions, and legislation denying legal status to
secondary sanctions.

The legislation would probably include a European blocking resolution of the
kind used in the 1990s to mitigate the threat of sanctions related to Iran,
Libya and Cuba. That and a complaint against the US at the World Trade
Organisation had forced Washington to back down.

Mr Juncker said last night that work would begin on a blocking resolution today
to try to get it in place before August 6, the 90-day deadline when sanctions
would be reimposed. There is considerable doubt, however, over whether such a
compromise would be possible with an administration apparently so oblivious to
its allies' concerns. Mrs Merkel also questioned the feasibility of indemnifying
European companies affected by the sanctions. Last week the US ambassador to
Berlin ordered German companies to start winding up their business in Iran. Mrs
Merkel said that although it might be possible to give relief to smaller and
medium-size companies, doing so across the board would be harder. "We cannot and
must not create illusions," she warned.

It remains to be seen whether Brussels will be swift enough to steady commercial
nerves. The French oil company Total has said that it will not continue a
billion-dollar project in Iran unless it is granted a waiver by Washington. It
said that it "cannot afford to be exposed to any secondary sanctions", including
the loss of financing by American banks. The insurance group Allianz and the
shipping company Maersk are also closing their operations.

In contrast, Iranian state television reported that Iran had just signed an
agreement with a British consortium to develop an oilfield, the first with a US
ally since Mr Trump's decision. Colin Rowley, the managing director of Pergas
International Consortium, and Bijan Alipour, managing director of the National
Iranian South Oil Company, signed a preliminary deed on the partnership on
Wednesday night.

If a contract is signed, more than $1 billion will be spent to produce 200,000
barrels of crude oil a day over the next decade in the 55-year old Karanj
oilfield, up from 12,000 barrels a day. Pergas seems to do little business in
the US, potentially giving it more freedom to operate in Iran.

Mr Macron kicked off the day's talks in Sofia with a call for European unity,
saying that it had become the only guarantor of global stability. "When
challenges threaten to destabilise the world, the only solution is to join our
forces to respond in one voice," he said. "European sovereignty is the guarantor
of international stability."

Mr Tusk delivered a sharp rebuke to the US president before the summit. "Looking
at the latest decisions of Donald Trump someone could even think: with friends
like that who needs enemies," Mr Tusk wrote in a letter to leaders. "But
frankly, the EU should be grateful. Thanks to him we got rid of all illusions.
We realised that if you need a helping hand, you will find one at the end of
your arm."

Analysis Europe's struggle to save the Iran nuclear deal from collapse may be
its most pressing diplomatic and security challenge. But the US decision to pull
out of the agreement, imperilling its very survival, has far wider ramifications
(Catherine Philp writes).

After more than a year of slights, threats and discord, over issues from defence
spending to trade to the threat from climate change, President Trump made clear
his contempt for his European allies and the rules-based international order
when he announced his withdrawal from the Iran nuclear agreement.

The deal was born in Europe after the 2003 Iraq War, when Britain, France and
Germany took on the task of addressing Iran's nuclear ambitions. European unity
was shaken by the continent's split over the Iraq invasion but its three biggest
powers came together only months later to begin the often painful 12-year
journey towards the Iran nuclear deal.

Having withdrawn, Mr Trump has not only spurned multilateral diplomacy but has
put the US in material breach of an international agreement enshrined in a
unanimous UN security council resolution. Not content with that, he is
threatening to punish Europe by imposing sanctions on its companies and
institutions doing business with Iran.

It was, Donald Tusk noted, a reality check months in the coming. Mr Trump should
be thanked for puncturing Europe's illusion that it could rely on the US and
showing that it must act alone and united.

So far unity is holding. On the issues that most divide Europe and the US,
European states have remained remarkably in step, with each other and with the
postwar global order. What is unclear is how they can maintain the latter in the
absence of American leadership or even co-operation.

Pax Americana faltered under George W Bush's unilateralism and overreach, only
to be compounded by Barack Obama's attempted corrective, an American retreat. Mr
Trump's "capricious assertiveness," in Mr Tusk's words, economic nationalism and
disregard for the norms of diplomacy mean that Europe also finds the US actively
undermining it on issues from climate change to Iran.

This is perhaps most of a shock to Britain as it prepares for Brexit, a divorce
it had wrongly believed would mean it could move closer to the US in a
re-energised special www.relationship.No one benefits more from Europe's
fracture with the US than Russia, which longs for the demise of Nato and the
shattering of western unity. That is why European leaders cannot afford wholly
to turn their backs on the transatlantic alliance.

Europe has no other superpower with which it can ally if Russia grows more
aggressive - and it still depends on transatlantic trade, one of the engines of
the global economy.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: President Macron, Theresa May andLUDOVIC MARIN/AFP/GETTYChancellor
Merkel met in Sofia, where they affirmed their commitment to the Iran nuclear
deal despite the US pulling out

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              78 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Moscow may use gas pipe to spy on West, US warns

BYLINE: David Charter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 358 words


America has warned that Moscow could use an $11 billion gas pipeline project
between Germany and Russia to spy in the Baltic Sea.

Sandra Oudkirk, deputy assistant secretary in the State Department, said that
the US was strongly opposed to the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. Washington warned
that the project to double the amount of Russian gas exported to Germany could
trigger a new set of sanctions.

The US believes that Moscow will be able to exert greater influence over Berlin
as well as cut about $1 billion a year in transit fees paid to Ukraine for
piping natural gas to Europe, and that dependence on the pipeline will weaken
the impact of western sanctions on Moscow. US officials are generally suspicious
of closer relations between Germany and Russia.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, will meet President Putin for the first
time this year at Sochi today for talks focused on preserving the Iran nuclear
deal. Relations between Germany and Russia have been cool since Russia annexed
Crimea in 2014.

The timing of the pipeline criticism seems designed to exert pressure when
President Trump's repudiation of the Iran deal is forcing Berlin and Moscow to
work together more closely. "We would be delighted if the project did not take
place," Ms Oudkirk, an energy policy expert, said in Berlin.

She claimed that the pipeline would divert gas flows away from Ukraine and could
become a pathway for Russia to install surveillance equipment in the Baltic Sea,
a sensitive military region.

The US has regarded the project as a strategic victory for Russia and is
suspicious of the appointment of Gerhard Schröder, the former chancellor, as
chairman of the pipeline board.

Jens Müller, a spokesman for Nord Stream 2, dismissed the concerns. He said that
the pipeline would be one of many sources of natural gas for Europe. "This
pipeline cannot be used to blackmail or negatively affect any country," he said.

Mrs Merkel has vowed to safeguard Ukraine's interests after a plea from
President Poroshenko. Peter Altmaier, the German economy minister, was sent to
Moscow and Kiev this week to secure a deal that would keep some gas flowing
through Ukraine.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              79 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                              May 18, 2018 Friday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Trump makes western alliance great again;
For all the transatlantic bickering over defence spending, the United States is
determined to strengthen Nato

BYLINE: Edward Lucas

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 933 words


Europe and America cannot agree about anything. Except, that is, when it comes
to the future of the world's most important and successful military alliance.
Despite Donald Trump's erratic diplomacy and splenetic disdain for allies, the
prospects for the Nato summit in Brussels in mid-July are surprisingly
promising.

True, the gulf across the Atlantic will be on display, with theatrical public
rows about defence spending. Mr Trump will lambast the Europeans as cheapskate
freeloaders. Only a handful of the alliance's 29 members meet its defence
spending target of 2 per cent of GDP.

American taxpayers, in short, pick up the tab for the European welfare state.
Allies get most of the benefit from Nato, while Americans shoulder most of the
burden.

Amid worries about American unilateralism on Iran, the Middle East, climate
change and trade, European leaders are in no mood to be lectured. They too will
play to the gallery, decrying the Trump administration's arrogance and
recklessness.

Yet this much-derided administration, with strong congressional support, has
boosted, not cut, America's contribution to the Continent's security, splurging
money in eastern Europe and sending back the heavy armour that the Obama
administration withdrew. The US has beefed up its military ties with non-Nato
Sweden and Finland. Last month the Pentagon announced the restoration of the
Second Fleet, the US navy's North Atlantic command.

All this is thanks to Russia. By attacking Ukraine in 2014 and stepping up
mischief-making elsewhere, Vladimir Putin rebooted transatlanticism. Nato now
focuses on its core mission: territorial defence. The multinational tripwire
forces recently deployed in the Baltic republics and Poland have transformed the
security of these frontline states, while the danger of a Russian sneak attack
has receded. We are all safer as a result.

With the Baltic region largely sorted, attention is turning to the Balkans and
the Black Sea. One worry is Turkey, which is increasing its military
co-operation with Russia amid rows with the West over Syria. Instability and
Russian meddling in ex-Yugoslavia are bothersome. Hopes are growing that
Macedonia will finally get the chance to join the alliance but other candidates
such as Bosnia, Kosovo and Serbia are still distant prospects. Russian bluster
and threats have created a de facto veto on any further Nato expansion in the
Kremlin's former empire.

Nato is also grappling with the changing face of warfare: cyberattacks,
artificial intelligence, propaganda, targeted corruption and the like. Britain's
capabilities are in demand here and they may even help us to secure a British
replacement for Jens Stoltenberg, who steps down as Nato secretarygeneral in
2020. Potential candidates are jostling, though no heavyweight is in sight.
(David Cameron would like the job but Brexit-bruised EU countries regard him
with loathing.) The alliance's most pressing problems, though, are unglamorous
ones, chiefly logistics. These have decayed scandalously since the days of the
Cold War. Transporting tanks over Europe's congested rail network takes weeks,
when it should take days or hours. Paperwork is burdensome.

This is changing, though not fast enough. The July summit will approve the
creation of a new Joint Support and Enabling Command in Ulm, Germany, to handle
transport, infrastructure, cybersecurity and other boring-but-important issues.
Spending money on dual-use facilities such as bigger ports, stronger bridges,
heavier rail wagons and better transhipment points offers Germany a chance to
sidestep American criticism about its defence spending, which is a measly 1.2
per cent of GDP. With an anti-American tide running strongly in Germany,
concentrating on logistics is an easier sell. Germans may fret that Nato is a
front for warmongering US weapons manufacturers. It is harder to argue against
better rail freight.

This approach will be far better than trying to bully Angela Merkel's government
into keeping its empty promise to meet the Nato 2 per cent target by 2024.
Indeed, given Germany's huge economy, such a spending splurge would make it the
Continent's military superpower, with potentially destabilising effects.

A second big issue is decisionmaking. Modern threats evolve rapidly and
confusingly. In the event of a Russian provocation, deliberations at the North
Atlantic council, Nato's decision-making body, could be too slow. From a
military perspective, the supreme allied commander in Europe, the American
general Curtis Scaparrotti, needs more authority - for example to deploy a
rapid-reaction force somewhere in eastern Europe at short notice. That treads on
sensitive toes: parliamentary consent for the use of armed force is
constitutionally entrenched in some countries, and enjoys strong political and
public support in others. American presidents are nervous about this too:
conflicts can start anywhere, but only the US can end them.

For all the fire, fog and fury in transatlantic relations, exemplified by Mr
Stoltenberg's hurriedly arranged peacekeeping mission to the White House
yesterday, the alliance's great advantage is that it is the only game in town.
It ties Europe to the US. It ties Britain to Europe. It is Europe's only defence
against Russia. Nato's expansion increases security and promotes modernisation.
It is the only organisation that can deploy speedy, effective military force
against threats in north Africa, the Middle East and other foreign hotspots.
Nothing else comes close. On that, at least, everyone agrees.

Many Germans fret that Nato is a front for a warmongering US

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              80 of 119 DOCUMENTS


                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday

BY GOVE, SHE'S GOT IT! TRACEY IS MICHAEL TO A TEE

BYLINE: BY SUSIE COEN TV AND RADIO REPORTER

LENGTH: 200 words


CLUTCHING an important looking dossier, Michael Gove looks like he is simply
going about his day at the House of Commons.

But despite the familiar black glasses and trademark pout, this is not the
Conservative MP - it's comedian Tracey Ullman in another of her clever guises as
a politician.

Miss Ullman, 58, created the caricature of the Environment Secretary for her BBC
One show Tracey Breaks The News. Another new character is Jacob Rees-Mogg,
played by Liam Hourican. The traditionalist Tory MP will be accompanied by his
long-suffering nanny.

Up to 2.4million viewers tuned in to the show last autumn to see Miss Ullman as
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn and French first lady Brigitte Macron, as well as
Angela Merkel, Nicola Sturgeon and Theresa May.

She will now be taking on Brexiteer Mr Gove in the second series, the first
episode of which airs on June 1.

On the podcast The Chat earlier this year, Miss Ullman said she enjoyed doing
satire because the shows have to be made quickly to stay relevant.

She said: Now we are doing a more immediate format, which is great fun. I always
used to shoot shows and then they would go out six months later. But
everything's so fast in the world now.'

© Daily Mail

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


                   Copyright 2018 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              81 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                                  Daily Mirror

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

TODAY: THURSDAY, MAY 17, 2018

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 219 words


On this day

28 YEARS AGO (1990)

We reported an IRA bombing outside an Army careers office in Wembley, North
London. Sgt Charles Chapman, 34, was killed and four others hurt.

40 YEARS AGO (1978)

Charlie Chaplin's coffin was recovered near his home in Lausanne, Switzerland,
11 weeks after it had been stolen in a bizarre ransom plot.

58 YEARS AGO (1960)

Talks between the US, USSR, Britain and France in Paris broke down after a row
over an American U2 spy plane shot down by the Russians.

Birthdays

Irish singer Enya is 57. Former Home Secretary Alan Johnson is 68.

Ex-middleweight world champion Charles 'Sugar' Ray Leonard is 62. And many happy
returns to Mirror readers Kayleigh Swift, from Wigan, who is 18 and Rachel
Burgess, from Hullbridge, Essex, who turns 27 today.

If you'd like us to mention the birthday of a loved one, write to Birthdays,
Daily Mirror, One Canada Square, London E14 5AP or yourvoice@mirror.co.uk

Today's events

7am Theresa May, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Emmanuel
Macron meet in Bulgaria ahead of EU-Western Balkans summit. 6.30pm Gary Barlow
performs the first of three solo shows at the London Palladium.

7.45pm League Two Play-offs 2nd leg: Exeter City v Lincoln City.

Today's giggle

A lorry-load of tortoises crashed into a trainload of terrapins. It was a turtle
disaster.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Enya, 57 Alan, 68 Sugar Ray, 62 Enya

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2018 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              82 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                                  Daily Mirror

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                Northern Ireland

TODAY: THURSDAY, MAY 17, 2018

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 219 words


On this day

28 YEARS AGO (1990)

We reported an IRA bombing outside an Army careers office in Wembley, North
London. Sgt Charles Chapman, 34, was killed and four others hurt.

40 YEARS AGO (1978)

Charlie Chaplin's coffin was recovered near his home in Lausanne, Switzerland,
11 weeks after it had been stolen in a bizarre ransom plot.

58 YEARS AGO (1960)

Talks between the US, USSR, Britain and France in Paris broke down after a row
over an American U2 spy plane shot down by the Russians.

Birthdays

Irish singer Enya is 57. Former Home Secretary Alan Johnson is 68.

Ex-middleweight world champion Charles 'Sugar' Ray Leonard is 62. And many happy
returns to Mirror readers Kayleigh Swift, from Wigan, who is 18 and Rachel
Burgess, from Hullbridge, Essex, who turns 27 today.

If you'd like us to mention the birthday of a loved one, write to Birthdays,
Daily Mirror, One Canada Square, London E14 5AP or yourvoice@mirror.co.uk

Today's events

7am Theresa May, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Emmanuel
Macron meet in Bulgaria ahead of EU-Western Balkans summit. 6.30pm Gary Barlow
performs the first of three solo shows at the London Palladium.

7.45pm League Two Play-offs 2nd leg: Exeter City v Lincoln City.

Today's giggle

A lorry-load of tortoises crashed into a trainload of terrapins. It was a turtle
disaster.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Enya, 57 Alan, 68 Enya

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DMR


                            Copyright 2018 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              83 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Breaking news

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 75 words


Tracey Ullman, pictured as Michael Gove, will be returning to BBC screens for
three new episodes of Tracey Breaks The News next month. With her distinctive
comic spin on the headlines, including her impressions of politicians and
celebrities, Ullman will bring a new take to the likes of Jeremy Corbyn, Angela
Merkel and Brigitte Macron. She will also introduce a new double act featuring
Jacob Rees-Mogg (Liam Hourican) and his long-suffering Nanny.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: BBC

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2018 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              84 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Buy this smaller companies trust for exposure to Europe's fastest-growing firms;

It is an area that investors tend to shy away from - and that gives rise to an
opportunity

BYLINE: Richard Evans

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 765 words


EUROPEAN stock markets attracted plenty of attention from investors in the early
part of this year, thanks to improved economic performance and reasonable
valuations. But Questor doubts that many of those investors chose European
smaller companies funds for their exposure to the continent.

We suspect that most readers who decided to commit money to Europe will have
chosen trusts such as Questor pick Jupiter European Opportunities, which favours
larger businesses.

But there is a case for including both types of fund in a balanced portfolio in
order to improve diversification, while adding exposure to the growth prospects
that smaller companies offer.

Smaller Companies may offer even better opportunities for outperformance in
future because a change to brokerage regulation Questor Inheritance Tax
Portfolio is likely to result in them being less researched. This could see more
stocks being mispriced.

One investment trust focused on smaller European stocks is Montanaro European
Smaller Companies, which Brewin Dolphin, the wealth manager, holds on behalf of
some of its clients.

John Moore, of Brewin, told Questor: "Europe has been a challenging place to
invest in recent years, thanks to developments such as QE from the central bank,
the backlash against Angela Merkel, and the crisis over Catalan independence.

"The Montanaro trust has managed to navigate these tricky circumstances pretty
well. The next few years could be difficult in other ways, of course, but we
feel that the portfolio's investment process has been validated by its recent
avoidance of some of the elephant traps thrown in its way."

He said the trust had a bias towards "quality" stocks - those with low debts and
the ability to make sustainable profits that are delivered as cash. This should
stand it in good stead if economic conditions do change.

"The very fact that few investors choose European smaller companies creates an
opportunity," Moore said. "However, after years of producing annual returns of
about 13pc you wouldn't expect them to be exactly cheap." Instead they tend to
trade at multiples of about 16 times earnings.

Moore's firm typically holds about 5pc-7pc of a client's assets in European
shares, assuming a medium attitude to risk, with as little as 1pc in smaller
European stocks. "Even a 1pc holding can make a difference, given the effect of
compounding if 13pc returns are maintained, but only if you hold for the long
term, such as 10 years," he added.

Montanaro European Smallers currently trades at an appreciable discount of
14.2pc, although Moore cautioned against buying the trust on the expectation
that the discount would narrow, saying it reflected the relative lack of demand
for smaller European stocks and the fact that they could be illiquid.

Questor says: buy Ticker: MTE Share price at close: 865p

Update: Pershing Square, one of Questor's poorest performers, has announced the
results of its "tender" offer. It will buy back shares offered for repurchase at
$13.47 (997p at the current exchange rate), a 20.5pc discount to the portfolio's
net asset value (NAV) on May 9, the reference point for the buyback.

The shares now stand at 975p, a discount of 22.1pc.

Shareholders whose shares are repurchased have effectively done remaining
investors a favour: by accepting a discounted price for their shares they have
increased by 2.1pc the net asset value attributable to those that remain in
issue, the trust said.

Analysts at Jefferies, the broker, said: "With NAV performance broadly back on
an even keel in 2018 so far, Pershing Square is well placed to make inroads over
the remainder of the year."

However, they acknowledged that investor sentiment towards the fund remained
"lamentable". Hold.

Investment trust news Scottish Mortgage has said it intends to make greater use
of gearing (borrowing to invest). Artemis Alpha's board has proposed that the
portfolio become more concentrated, that continuation votes be replaced by
tender offers every three years, and that the dividend should rise by more than
inflation each year. Blue Capital Alternative Income proposes to wind itself up.

Read Questor's rules of investment before you follow our tips:
www.telegraph.co.uk/go/ questorrules; www.twitter.com/DTQUESTOR

Key numbers

Market value: £145m

Year of listing: 2006

Discount: 13.7pc

Ave discount over past year: 11.4pc

Yield: 0.99pc

Most recent year's dividend: 8.25p

Gearing: 13.4pc

Annual charge: 1.25pc

which on smaller is of place years, Montanaro European Smaller Companies Buy
Focus on 'quality' stocks should stand trust in good stead if economy worsens
Dyson Portfolio Dyson

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2018 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              85 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

EU divided on response to US trade threats

BYLINE: ALEX BARKER;JIM BRUNSDEN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 576 words


Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron were seeking yesterday to overcome deep
differences over their response to US trade demands, as a senior EU official
lashed out at the Trump administration's "capricious assertiveness".

President Donald Trump's threat of tariffs on steel imports emerged as the most
contentious topic at an informal dinner of EU leaders in Sofia, with the German
chancellor and French president holding starkly different approaches.

Germany, which is mindful of the threat to its car industry from US import
curbs, is supporting a move by Brussels to step up preparations for targeted
talks on trade liberalisation intended as a conciliatory gesture towards
Washington. However, France, Spain and the Netherlands fear such an approach
could reward Mr Trump's aggressive tactics.

The threat of punitive steel and aluminium tariffs is one of several Trump
administration moves that are stretching transatlantic relations to breaking
point. EU leaders were yesterday also due to discuss the US withdrawal from the
Iran nuclear accord and the recent bloodshed in Gaza that followed the
relocation of the US embassy in Israel to Jerusalem.

"Looking at the latest decisions of Donald Trump someone could even think: with
friends like that who needs enemies," said Donald Tusk, the European Council
president, in caustic remarks over American "capricious assertiveness".

"But frankly, the EU should be grateful. Thanks to him we got rid of all
illusions. We realise that if you need a helping hand, you will find one at the
end of your arm."

After having twice granted one month delays to the tariffs, the Trump
administration insists that a permanent exemption depends on the EU addressing
what Washington sees as unfair barriers against US exports The EU differences
over trade were clear at a meeting of senior officials on Monday that debated
how far the European Commission should go in "scoping" the parameters of
possible future trade talks with the US, according to two diplomats present.

Martin Selmayr, the commission secretary-general, described plans for more
intense "talks about talks", prompting objections from French officials, who
stress the EU must not be bullied to the negotiating table.

Mr Selmayr described an approach that would focus on four areas: tariffs for
industrial goods; trade in liquefied natural gas; enhanced regulatory
co-operation; and the removal of a US block on renewing judges at the World
Trade Organization appellate body.

Since tariffs were announced by the US in March, the EU has insisted it would
not negotiate its way out of measures that it sees as illegal. But at the same
time it made clear it would be ready to hold talks on reducing trade tensions
once the US granted permanent relief.

"We shouldn't be paying to stop something that is illegal," said one eurozone
diplomat with concerns about the approach. "We would not be talking about this
if Trump has not threatened tariffs, it's as simple as that. He'll come for
more."

Despite the EU refusal to grant unilateral concessions or negotiate under
threat, Cecilia Malmstrom, the EU's trade commissioner, has been holding talks
with Wilbur Ross, the US commerce secretary, since the end of March, to weigh up
possible options for future trade talks. The two officials spoke on Tuesday,
with contacts to continue in the coming days.

Mr Tusk urged leaders to "stick to our guns" in the run-up to yesterday's
meeting.

"Unity is our greatest strength," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Donald Tusk: 'With friends like that who needs enemies,' the European
Council president saidFactory floor: workers walk through an aluminium factory
in Essen, Germany. Washington is considering tariffs on metals- Jasper
Juinen/Bloomberg

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              86 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

EU divided on response to US trade threats;
Transatlantic chill

BYLINE: ALEX BARKER;JIM BRUNSDEN

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 576 words


Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron were seeking yesterday to overcome deep
differences over their response to US trade demands, as a senior EU official
lashed out at the Trump administration's "capricious assertiveness".

President Donald Trump's threat of tariffs on steel imports emerged as the most
contentious topic at an informal dinner of EU leaders in Sofia, with the German
chancellor and French president holding starkly different approaches.

Germany, which is mindful of the threat to its car industry from US import
curbs, is supporting a move by Brussels to step up preparations for targeted
talks on trade liberalisation intended as a conciliatory gesture towards
Washington. However, France, Spain and the Netherlands fear such an approach
could reward Mr Trump's aggressive tactics.

The threat of punitive steel and aluminium tariffs is one of several Trump
administration moves that are stretching transatlantic relations to breaking
point. EU leaders were yesterday also due to discuss the US withdrawal from the
Iran nuclear accord and the recent bloodshed in Gaza that followed the
relocation of the US embassy in Israel to Jerusalem.

"Looking at the latest decisions of Donald Trump someone could even think: with
friends like that who needs enemies," said Donald Tusk, the European Council
president, in caustic remarks over American "capricious assertiveness".

"But frankly, the EU should be grateful. Thanks to him we got rid of all
illusions. We realise that if you need a helping hand, you will find one at the
end of your arm."

After having twice granted one month delays to the tariffs, the Trump
administration insists that a permanent exemption depends on the EU addressing
what Washington sees as unfair barriers against US exports The EU differences
over trade were clear at a meeting of senior officials on Monday that debated
how far the European Commission should go in "scoping" the parameters of
possible future trade talks with the US, according to two diplomats present.

Martin Selmayr, the commission secretary-general, described plans for more
intense "talks about talks", prompting objections from French officials, who
stress the EU must not be bullied to the negotiating table.

Mr Selmayr described an approach that would focus on four areas: tariffs for
industrial goods; trade in liquefied natural gas; enhanced regulatory
co-operation; and the removal of a US block on renewing judges at the World
Trade Organization appellate body.

Since tariffs were announced by the US in March, the EU has insisted it would
not negotiate its way out of measures that it sees as illegal. But at the same
time it made clear it would be ready to hold talks on reducing trade tensions
once the US granted permanent relief.

"We shouldn't be paying to stop something that is illegal," said one eurozone
diplomat with concerns about the approach. "We would not be talking about this
if Trump has not threatened tariffs, it's as simple as that. He'll come for
more."

Despite the EU refusal to grant unilateral concessions or negotiate under
threat, Cecilia Malmstrom, the EU's trade commissioner, has been holding talks
with Wilbur Ross, the US commerce secretary, since the end of March, to weigh up
possible options for future trade talks. The two officials spoke on Tuesday,
with contacts to continue in the coming days.

Mr Tusk urged leaders to "stick to our guns" in the run-up to yesterday's
meeting.

"Unity is our greatest strength," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Donald Tusk: 'With friends like that who needs enemies,' the European
Council president saidFactory floor: workers walk through an aluminium factory
in Essen, Germany. Washington is considering tariffs on metals- Jasper
Juinen/Bloomberg

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              87 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

EU divided on response to US trade threats

BYLINE: ALEX BARKER ;JIM BRUNSDEN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 576 words


Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron were seeking yesterday to overcome deep
differences over their response to US trade demands, as a senior EU official
lashed out at the Trump administration's "capricious assertiveness".

President Donald Trump's threat of tariffs on steel imports emerged as the most
contentious topic at an informal dinner of EU leaders in Sofia, with the German
chancellor and French president holding starkly different approaches.

Germany, which is mindful of the threat to its car industry from US import
curbs, is supporting a move by Brussels to step up preparations for targeted
talks on trade liberalisation intended as a conciliatory gesture towards
Washington. However, France, Spain and the Netherlands fear such an approach
could reward Mr Trump's aggressive tactics.

The threat of punitive steel and aluminium tariffs is one of several Trump
administration moves that are stretching transatlantic relations to breaking
point. EU leaders were yesterday also due to discuss the US withdrawal from the
Iran nuclear accord and the recent bloodshed in Gaza that followed the
relocation of the US embassy in Israel to Jerusalem.

"Looking at the latest decisions of Donald Trump someone could even think: with
friends like that who needs enemies," said Donald Tusk, the European Council
president, in caustic remarks over American "capricious assertiveness".

"But frankly, the EU should be grateful. Thanks to him we got rid of all
illusions. We realise that if you need a helping hand, you will find one at the
end of your arm."

After having twice granted one month delays to the tariffs, the Trump
administration insists that a permanent exemption depends on the EU addressing
what Washington sees as unfair barriers against US exports The EU differences
over trade were clear at a meeting of senior officials on Monday that debated
how far the European Commission should go in "scoping" the parameters of
possible future trade talks with the US, according to two diplomats present.

Martin Selmayr, the commission secretary-general, described plans for more
intense "talks about talks", prompting objections from French officials, who
stress the EU must not be bullied to the negotiating table.

Mr Selmayr described an approach that would focus on four areas: tariffs for
industrial goods; trade in liquefied natural gas; enhanced regulatory
co-operation; and the removal of a US block on renewing judges at the World
Trade Organization appellate body.

Since tariffs were announced by the US in March, the EU has insisted it would
not negotiate its way out of measures that it sees as illegal. But at the same
time it made clear it would be ready to hold talks on reducing trade tensions
once the US granted permanent relief.

"We shouldn't be paying to stop something that is illegal," said one eurozone
diplomat with concerns about the approach. "We would not be talking about this
if Trump has not threatened tariffs, it's as simple as that. He'll come for
more."

Despite the EU refusal to grant unilateral concessions or negotiate under
threat, Cecilia Malmstrom, the EU's trade commissioner, has been holding talks
with Wilbur Ross, the US commerce secretary, since the end of March, to weigh up
possible options for future trade talks. The two officials spoke on Tuesday,
with contacts to continue in the coming days.

Mr Tusk urged leaders to "stick to our guns" in the run-up to yesterday's
meeting.

"Unity is our greatest strength," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Donald Tusk: 'With friends like that who needs enemies,' the European
Council president saidFactory floor: workers walk through an aluminium factory
in Essen, Germany. Washington is considering tariffs on metals-Jasper
Juinen/Bloomberg

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              88 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

EU divided on response to US trade threats

BYLINE: ALEX BARKER ;JIM BRUNSDEN

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 576 words


Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron were seeking yesterday to overcome deep
differences over their response to US trade demands, as a senior EU official
lashed out at the Trump administration's "capricious assertiveness".

President Donald Trump's threat of tariffs on steel imports emerged as the most
contentious topic at an informal dinner of EU leaders in Sofia, with the German
chancellor and French president holding starkly different approaches.

Germany, which is mindful of the threat to its car industry from US import
curbs, is supporting a move by Brussels to step up preparations for targeted
talks on trade liberalisation intended as a conciliatory gesture towards
Washington. However, France, Spain and the Netherlands fear such an approach
could reward Mr Trump's aggressive tactics.

The threat of punitive steel and aluminium tariffs is one of several Trump
administration moves that are stretching transatlantic relations to breaking
point. EU leaders were yesterday also due to discuss the US withdrawal from the
Iran nuclear accord and the recent bloodshed in Gaza that followed the
relocation of the US embassy in Israel to Jerusalem.

"Looking at the latest decisions of Donald Trump someone could even think: with
friends like that who needs enemies," said Donald Tusk, the European Council
president, in caustic remarks over American "capricious assertiveness".

"But frankly, the EU should be grateful. Thanks to him we got rid of all
illusions. We realise that if you need a helping hand, you will find one at the
end of your arm."

After having twice granted one month delays to the tariffs, the Trump
administration insists that a permanent exemption depends on the EU addressing
what Washington sees as unfair barriers against US exports The EU differences
over trade were clear at a meeting of senior officials on Monday that debated
how far the European Commission should go in "scoping" the parameters of
possible future trade talks with the US, according to two diplomats present.

Martin Selmayr, the commission secretary-general, described plans for more
intense "talks about talks", prompting objections from French officials, who
stress the EU must not be bullied to the negotiating table.

Mr Selmayr described an approach that would focus on four areas: tariffs for
industrial goods; trade in liquefied natural gas; enhanced regulatory
co-operation; and the removal of a US block on renewing judges at the World
Trade Organization appellate body.

Since tariffs were announced by the US in March, the EU has insisted it would
not negotiate its way out of measures that it sees as illegal. But at the same
time it made clear it would be ready to hold talks on reducing trade tensions
once the US granted permanent relief.

"We shouldn't be paying to stop something that is illegal," said one eurozone
diplomat with concerns about the approach. "We would not be talking about this
if Trump has not threatened tariffs, it's as simple as that. He'll come for
more."

Despite the EU refusal to grant unilateral concessions or negotiate under
threat, Cecilia Malmstrom, the EU's trade commissioner, has been holding talks
with Wilbur Ross, the US commerce secretary, since the end of March, to weigh up
possible options for future trade talks. The two officials spoke on Tuesday,
with contacts to continue in the coming days.

Mr Tusk urged leaders to "stick to our guns" in the run-up to yesterday's
meeting.

"Unity is our greatest strength," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Donald Tusk: 'With friends like that who needs enemies,' the European
Council president saidFactory floor: workers walk through an aluminium factory
in Essen, Germany. Washington is considering tariffs on metals- Jasper
Juinen/Bloomberg

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              89 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 17, 2018 Thursday 7:40 PM GMT

Theresa May struggles to rally support among EU leaders for new customs plan;
Leo Varadkar, the Irish prime minister, warns that PM's proposals could be
insufficient to prevent hard border in Ireland

BYLINE: Daniel Boffey, Anne Perkins and Shaun Walker in Sofia

SECTION: POLITICS; Version:2

LENGTH: 812 words


A bold attempt by Theresa May to crack the Brexit impasse ran into trouble on
Thursday as the Irish prime minister warned a new customs plan signed off by her
warring ministers could be insufficient to avoid a hard border.

The prime minister has persuaded reluctant Brexiters to agree to a plan to
continue applying EU tariffs beyond the end of 2020, if no agreement has been
reached to alleviate the need for border checks.

May is now expected to deliver formal proposals within a couple of weeks,
following a frantic day of diplomacy in the margins of an EU security conference
that took her to Bulgaria and Macedonia.

She sought to rally support from EU leaders for a new plan for the so-called
"backstop", which would kick in if no solution has been found to the challenge
of avoiding a hard border.

After a 45-minute bilateral, the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, reported that he had
seen " new thinking ". He said that he welcomed anything that would align all of
the EU and the UK in terms of customs into the future. Brussels has made it
clear that Ireland must be satisfied before any deal is accepted.

But he suggested checks would still be required at the border if the UK left the
single market.

He said: "Any move on customs with the UK would be welcome but I need to be very
clear that avoiding a hard border between Northern Ireland and Ireland is about
more than customs. The single market and aspects related to regulation are
important as well."

On Tuesday, ministers on the Brexit committee agreed to a plan under which B
ritain would continue to levy EU tariffs, but retain the power to make its own
free-trade agreements.

On Thursday, May - with her chief Brexit adviser Olly Robbins - had a series of
meetings with the German chancellor Angela Merkel and the French president
Emanuel Macron, and further meetings with the EU commission president
Jean-Claude Juncker and the European council president Donald Tusk, as well as
Varadkar.

At a press conference in Skopje, Macedonia, at the end of the day, May confirmed
she still intended to seek a UK-wide proposal that would avoid the need for the
backstop to be invoked, and would take Britain out of the customs union.

"We will be, in future, outside that customs union able to develop our own
independent trade policy," she said.

It would mean as frictionless trade as possible, she insisted.

But while her statement reiterated familiar pledges, it was also compatible with
the latest proposal.

At a press conference before boarding the plane to return to London, the prime
minister said: "In December, when the joint report was published between the
European Union and the United Kingdom, we set out clearly options in relation to
the commitment that we have given for no hard border between Northern Ireland
and Ireland.

"We expect that to be dealt with through the overall relationship we have with
the European Union. But there were then two further levels of option, including
the final fallback option.

"The commission then published a fallback option which was not acceptable to to
us. And we will be bringing forward our own proposal for that fallback option in
due course."

EU sources said the prime minister was firmly told by Tusk, during a meeting
that she personally requested, that Brussels and Dublin needed to see the
concept on paper before they could give May any confidence about the June
European council summit.

The prime minister was said to appear anxious to know whether the proposal could
lead to Brussels starting work on a political declaration about the future
trading relationship with the UK.

Varadkar had warned earlier at the summit in Sofia that, without substantial
progress on the question of the Irish border, "we need to seriously question
whether we're going to have a withdrawal agreement at all".

The EU official said the meeting with Tusk had been about the UK's "expectations
in June".

He said: "We had to say it was too early to tell. All the news coming from
London is very disorientating. Tusk was clear that it is not only about what the
commission might recommend.

"They have to get all 27 member states to agree, and that includes Ireland. And
Tusk is squarely behind Dublin."

Varadkar later told reporters that, during 45 minutes of talks, May had sketched
out her hopes for what he described as a "deep customs arrangement", a phrase
which will likely inflame Brexiters in the UK, who fear that their hopes of
independent trade policy post-Brexit could be scotched.

Varadkar said: "The prime minister gave me an insight into some new thinking
that the UK government has in relation to customs, and obviously we'll see how
that develops, we haven't seen any detail of that yet.

"But certainly I think any move on customs which brings the UK closer to the EU
is to be welcomed, but I very much emphasised that resolving the issue of a hard
border requires more than customs."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              90 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 17, 2018 Thursday 3:00 PM GMT

EU sets course for US clash with law blocking Iran sanctions;
European leaders to launch statute to protect EU firms doing business in Iran

BYLINE: Patrick Wintour in London and Daniel Boffey in Sofia

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Version:4

LENGTH: 862 words


The EU has put itself on a collision course with the US over Donald Trump's
decision to withdraw from the nuclear deal with Iran, as major European firms
started to pull out of the country to avoid being hit by sanctions.

In an attempt to shield EU companies doing business with Iran, the European
commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, said he would turn to a plan last
used to protect businesses working in Cuba before a US trade embargo was lifted
on the Latin American country.

"We will begin the 'blocking statute' process, which aims to neutralise the
extraterritorial effects of US sanctions in the EU. We must do it and we will do
it tomorrow [Friday] morning at 10.30," he said at the end of a summit in the
Bulgarian capital, Sofia.

The EU is seeking to keep Iran in the 2015 accord by safeguarding the economic
benefits Tehran gained in return for giving up its nuclear programme.

The "blocking statute" is a 1996 regulation that prohibits EU companies and
courts from complying with foreign sanctions laws and stipulates that no foreign
court judgments based on these laws have any effect in the EU.

The European Investment Bank will also provide a funding stream for businesses
working in Iran.

Juncker said: "The effects of the US sanctions will be felt. It is the duty of
the EU therefore to protect European business and that applies particularly to
smaller and medium-size businesses."

The European council president, Donald Tusk, added at a meeting of EU leaders:
"We agreed unanimously that the EU will stay in the agreement as long as Iran
remains fully committed to it. Additionally the commission was given a green
light to be ready to act whenever European interests are affected."

Tusk, who accused Trump's administration of "capricious assertiveness" earlier
in the week, told reporters: "The problem is if your closest friend is
unpredictable. It is not a joke now. This is the essence of our problem now with
our friends on the other side of the Atlantic. I can agree with President Trump
when he said unpredictability can be a very useful tool in politics. But only
against enemies and opponents. Unpredictability is the last thing we need with
friends and family."

Despite the tough diplomatic rhetoric, however, the chances of the Iran nuclear
deal surviving the impact of US sanctions were dealt a blow when the Danish
shipping group A P Moller-Maersk said it was joining an exodus of companies
ceasing commercial activity in Iran.

Maersk, the world's largest oil shipping container firm, said on Thursday it
would honour customer agreements entered into before 8 May, but then wind them
down by 4 November, as required by the reimposed US sanctions.

The announcement came after the French oil firm Total announced on Wednesday
that it was going to pull out of its 50.1% stake in the South Pars 11 oil field.
Total said it would only retain its investment if the US gave it a specific
exemption from the planned sanctions. Its joint venture partners in China are
likely to take over its share of the investment.

Iran's oil exports were at 1m barrels a day, mostly to Asia and some European
countries, before sanctions were lifted. They subsequently climbed to 2.5m
barrels.

Maersk operates more than 160 vessels and employs 3,100 people worldwide with a
turnover of $836m in 2016.

The speed at which firms operating in Iran are pulling out is threatening to
wreck EU leaders' plans to provide legal and financial guarantees to protect
European firms that keep trading with Iran.

The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, admitted that the EU was limited in what
it could do.

She said: "We can see whether we can give small and medium-sized companies
certain relief. That is being examined... As for compensating all businesses in
a comprehensive way for such measures by the United States of America, I think
we cannot and must not create illusions."

Commenting on the Total decision, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said:
"We're not going to force French businesses to stay in Iran. The president of
the French republic is not the CEO of Total."

The Iranian government has warned that any exodus of EU investment would force
it to pull out of the nuclear deal preventing it from enriching uranium.

The heart of the Iran deal - which Trump branded "horrible" as he pulled out of
it earlier this month - was an Iranian commitment to limit its nuclear programme
in return for greater trade with the west.

The danger is that the dispute over Iran will spill into a wider row between the
EU and US over trade, and events will gather their own momentum as the US starts
to impose sanctions on key Iranian figures.

In a bid to keep the dispute from spiralling out of control, EU political
ambassadors travelled to New York and Washington to urge the US to give
carve-outs to EU firms from its sanctions policy. They are also warning the US
administration that economic chaos imposed on Iran will be counter-productive,
and is more likely to strengthen hardliners than lead to a regime change of
benefit to the west.

Günther Oettinger, the EU budget commissioner, urged the EU to remain united.
"One thing is very clear to me: Trump despises weaklings," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              91 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 17, 2018 Thursday 9:24 AM GMT

May says she working on new Brexit 'fallback option' but UK will runs its own
trade policy from 2021 - as it happened;
Rolling coverage of the day's political developments as they happenMay's press
conference in Macedonia - Summary and analysisAfternoon summary

BYLINE: Andrew Sparrow

SECTION: POLITICS; Version:17

LENGTH: 7336 words


block-time published-time 6.09pm BST


Afternoon summary

     ·    Theresa May has said the government is working on a "fallback option"
          to address the Irish border issue after Brexit. But, speaking at a
          press conference in Macedonia, she also insisted that the UK would
          operate "an independent trade policy" from 2021 - even though it has
          emerged that the fallback option would involve the UK maintaining the
          EU's common external tariff for a period after the end of the
          transition in 2020, which could make implementing new trade deals
          impossible. (See 5.06pm.)


     ·    The Irish taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, has raised the prospect of the UK
          crashing out of the EU without a deal if UK government infighting
          continues over the next few weeks.


     ·    Combustible cladding could be banned on high-rise buildings in the
          wake of the Grenfell Tower fire, the government has announced, despite
          a review of building regulations concluding it was not necessary.


     ·    The maximum permitted stake on controversial fixed-odds betting
          terminals (FOBTs) will be cut from £100 to £2, the government has
          announced after ministers ignored pleas from bookmakers and branded
          the machines a "social blight".


     ·    John McDonnell has withdrawn from speaking to the UK's prison officers
          union following accusations from a delegate from Northern Ireland that
          he has supported the tactics of republican terrorists.


     ·    The chief strategist of the Vote Leave campaign has refused to appear
          in front of MPs, risking possible censure from the House of Commons
          but also raising questions about what more can be done when a witness
          ignores the will of parliament.


     ·    Fracking opponents have reacted with anger after ministers unveiled
          measures to help projects through the planning system, which
          campaigners said would make drilling a shale well as easy as building
          a conservatory.


     ·    John Bercow, the speaker, has allowed an emergency debate to be held
          on Monday next week about complaints that the government is using a
          procedural device to block a private member's bill that would prevent
          the boundary review reducing the number of MPs from 650 to 600. The
          Labour MP Afzal Khan requested the emergency debate because his bill
          is being held up. Many Tory MPs backed him when he first raised this
          issue last week.



That's all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.

block-time published-time 5.29pm BST

Damian Green floats plan to get homeowner pensioners to pay £30,000 each into
national care fund

Damian Green, the former first secretary of state, was on the Today programme
this morning promoting a plan he has drawn up for a national care fund, to pay
for social care. It would everyone having to contribute something - effectively,
compulsory insurance - but the key feature of his proposal is to get pensioner
homeowners to use equity release to pay for their contributions, unlocking some
of the vast wealth tied up in property.

He told the programme:

It's a staggering amount of money. It is 1.7 trillion of equity owned by
over-65s with no mortgage left on their homes. A very small amount of that could
solve a lot of this crisis...

My suggestion would take a very small part of that wealth and leave them
significant amounts of money to hand on to their children, because I absolutely
accept that inheritance through the generations is important.

Green also said that his proposal was better than the so-called "dementia tax"
plan which was widely criticised when unveiled in the 2017 Conservative party
manifesto because it would ensure pensioner homeowners were left with a
"significant" amount of the value of their property to pass on to their
children.

In a speech to an Age UK/Reform conference later he fleshed out his plan in more
detail. It would involve pensioners with property having to pay an insurance
premium of perhaps £30,000 per head to pay for possible future care. They could
obtain the money by downsizing or by equity release, he said. Explaining the
advantages, he said:

The £30,000 figure is purely illustrative, and I am conscious of two caveats.
One, that government would still need to cover the long tail of the small number
who incurred the most costs, and secondly, that those with no equity would still
need to be covered by taxation.

But this radical policy would meet some of the most difficult political
concerns.

Downsizing and using the capital freed up to buy an insurance policy would still
allow the homeowner to pass the full value of their remaining property on to
their children.

While equity release schemes would reduce the amount available to pass onto
their children, by putting in place a minimum fixed amount that would be
inherited, some of the equity in their property would be guaranteed to pass on
to their children

Using their own money would enable older people to take greater control over
their care options and potentially enable them to choose better arrangements
than would be available to people entirely reliant on the state

The options potentially enable people to stay in their own homes longer which is
of benefit from a cost and emotional point of view and is shown to improve the
length and quality of older people's lives.

An insurance policy costs money, but it would eliminate older people's concern
that end of life care costs could eliminate all their assets and leave them with
nothing to pass on to their children.

Damian Green Photograph: Mark Thomas/REX/Shutterstock

block-time published-time 5.19pm BST

Leo Varadkar, the Irish prime minister, has said the UK should table new customs
plans within the next two weeks. These are from RTE's Tony Connelly.

enltrBREAKING: Taoiseach Leo Varadkar says that the British Prime Minister
Theresa May shd table a new proposal on the future customs relationship between
the EU & UK within the next 2 wks, hints it cd see continued alignment btwn
whole of UK and EU on customs into the future

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltrthe Taoiseach said the prime minister had given him some insights into what
he called "new thinking" on the British side.

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltrVaradkar: I said to the prime minister that any move that helped to align
all of the EU and the UK in terms of customs into the future would be
beneficial.

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltr"It would help solve some of the problems related to the border but not all
of them. It would certainly help us continue to trade between Britain and
Ireland much as we do now."

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltrFollowing a 45 minute meeting on the margins of the EU-Western Balkans
Summit, Mr Varadkar warned repeatedly that keeping the UK aligned on customs was
not the only thing required to avoid a hard border.

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltrTheresa May's new thinking, he said, was presented "verbally and
conceptually" and as such Dublin could not respond until it was presented as a
formal written proposal in the Brexit negotiations.

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltrTaoiseach said he was "not discouraged"by the meeting.

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltr"The PM gave me an insight into some new thinking the UK government as in
relation to customs. Obviously we'll see how that develops. We haven't been able
to get any detail on that yet,but certainly any move on customs that brings the
U.K. closer to the EU is to be welcomed.

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltrHe said he made it clear to the prime minister that Ireland would insist on
its red line of a legally operable backstop in the Withdrawal Agreement,
whatever progress was made on customs.

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltrAsked if the Theresa May could deliver on a new customs relationship given
the depths of opposition by hardliners in her cabinet, the Taoiseach said he
believed she could, although it involved the "internal politics of the UK.

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 5.06pm BST

What May said about UK customs plans - Summary and analysis

Here are the main points from Theresa May's press conference.


     ·    May said the UK would be bringing forward a fresh plan for a Brexit
          "fallback option" for the Irish border. The original fallback option
          was set up in paragraph 49 of the joint report (pdf) agreed by the UK
          and the EU in December. It said:


The United Kingdom remains committed to protecting North-South cooperation and
to its guarantee of avoiding a hard border. Any future arrangements must be
compatible with these overarching requirements. The United Kingdom's intention
is to achieve these objectives through the overall EU-UK relationship. Should
this not be possible, the United Kingdom will propose specific solutions to
address the unique circumstances of the island of Ireland. In the absence of
agreed solutions, the United Kingdom will maintain full alignment with those
rules of the internal market and the customs union which, now or in the future,
support North-South cooperation, the all-island economy and the protection of
the 1998 agreement.

This afternoon May said that she had had a constructive meeting with the Irish
prime minister, Leo Varadkar, earlier today. She went on:

We are working on what our future customs relationship with the European Union
will be. In December, when the joint report was published between the European
Union and the United Kingdom, we set out clearly options in relation to the
commitment that we have given for no hard border between Northern Ireland and
Ireland. We expect that to be dealt through the overall relationship we have
with the European Union. But there were then two further levels of option,
including the final fallback option.

The commission then published a fallback option which was not acceptable to to
us. And we will be bringing forward our own proposal for that fallback option in
due course.

Her reference to the unacceptable EU proposal was to the draft withdrawal
agreement published in February, which defined the fallback in terms of Northern
Ireland forming a common regulatory area with the Republic of Ireland - implying
a regulatory gap between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK. This morning
it was reported that May will propose keeping the UK bound by EU's common
external tariff for a period after the transition as an alternative fallback
position (see 9.24am), and her comment this afternoon was consistent with that
being her plan. This would amount to the UK effectively staying in the customs
union for longer than planned, although the government would dispute that
terminology.


     ·    May said that UK would operate "an independent trade policy" from
          2021. Brexiters are opposed to staying in the customs union for any
          longer than necessary because, although the UK will be free to
          negotiate trade deals during the transition, it will not be able to
          implement them until it leaves the customs union at the end of the
          transition. As my colleague Heather Stewart reports, the proposed new
          "backstop" plan would involve the UK maintaining the common external
          tariff for a period after 2020 but opting out of the common commercial
          policy (which prevents countries negotiating their own trade deals).
          This afternoon May stressed she was committed to being able to operate
          an independent trade policy from 2021. She said:


First of all, we are very clear that we will be leaving the customs union. We
will be, in future, outside that customs union able to develop our own
independent trade policy...

We are committed, as we leave the customs union and as we look to that future
economic partnership, to ensuring that we have a relationship that enables us to
have as frictionless trade with the European Union as possible, that we also do
[avoid a hard border between Northern Ireland and Ireland] but also that we are
able to have an independent trade policy. And that's what we will be doing and
ensuring that at the end of the implementation period - so, as from the end of
December 2020 - we will be able to be operating an independent trade policy.

The danger for May is that her two proposals - remaining bound by the common
external tariff for a period after 2020, but having an independent trade policy
at the same time - will be ruled mutually exclusive by the EU.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.10pm BST

block-time published-time 4.32pm BST

No 10 says EU withdrawal bill will return to Commons before summer recess

There is some sign of movement in the Brexit legislative logjam, with the news
that the EU withdrawal bill, amended by the Lords 15 times, will now return to
the Commons for MPs to consider the amendments before the summer recess.

Earlier on Thursday the leader of the Commons, Andrea Leadsom, announced next
week's business, which had no space for the bill - or any news of other Brexit
bills.

But Theresa May's spokeswoman told journalists this afternoon it would return to
the Commons "within weeks rather than months" - that is, before the long summer
recess, which begins on 24 July. She said:

We are taking time to consider the amendments, and that is what you would expect
us to do on an issue so important.

There is still, however, no news on when MPs can expect to again see the
Brexit-related trade and customs bills, or any news at all on bills connected to
immigration and fisheries.

block-time published-time 4.24pm BST

May says UK will publish its own plan for Brexit 'fallback option' on Irish
border

Q: Will the UK have proposals on customs by the end of June?

May says she has a very useful meeting with the Irish PM today. In the joint
report in December the UK and the EU set out options for Ireland. Those measures
are supposed to be addressed through the UK/EU relationship. There was a
fallback option. When the EU turned that into a text, there was a version of the
fallback option. May says that was unacceptable to the UK. But the UK will bring
forward its own fallback option, she says.


     ·    May says UK will bring forward new plans for a "fallback option" to
          address the Irish border problem "in due course".


This seems to confirm the thrust of what the Telegraph and Politico Europe were
reporting this morning. (Se e 9.24am.)

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.25pm BST

block-time published-time 4.17pm BST

May says UK will leave customs union and will operate its own trade policy after
2020

Q: Can you assure people there will be no extension to the customs arrangement
with the EU after Brexit?

May says the UK will be leaving the customs union.

After that there will have to be customs arrangements in place.

She wants the UK to have as frictionless trade then as possible. She also wants
to ensure there is no hard border in Ireland, and to ensure that the UK can have
a trade policy.

From the end of 2020 the UK will be able to operate its own trade policy, she
says.


     ·    May says UK will leave customs union and will operate its own trade
          policy after 2020.


block-time published-time 4.15pm BST

Asked about Hungary, corruption and security in the region, May singles out
Russia for criticism. She says Russia has been intervening in a number of ways.
We saw that in the chemical attack in Salisbury, she says.

She says it is important for countries to come together. That is why the support
Macedonia showed after the Salisbury attack was so important, she says.

She says security came up in her talks today with the Macedonian PM.

block-time published-time 4.13pm BST

May speaks about the UK's links with Macedonia and says Macedonia is an integral
part of Europe. She says relations between the two countries are closer than
they have been for more than 20 years.

block-time published-time 4.10pm BST

Theresa May's press conference

Theresa May is now holding a press conference in Macedonia.

block-time published-time 3.23pm BST

These are from RTE's Tony Connelly on the May/Varadkar bilateral in Sofia
earlier. (See 10.36am and 11.10am.)

enltrThe Taoiseach Leo Varadkar and British PM Theresa May have had a 30 minute
meeting in Sofia on the margins of the EU Western Balkans summit in Sofia. I'm
told it was "useful but frank".

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

enltrBoth sides set out their perspectives, no breakthrough on the backstop (but
none was really expected). Taoiseach warned that time is running out. Hint that
UK may bring forward proposals soon, but no info on what they will contain.

- Tony Connelly (@tconnellyRTE) May 17, 2018

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.17pm BST

block-time published-time 3.13pm BST

Theresa May is now in Macedonia. She is due to give a short press conference at
some point after 4pm UK time.

Theresa May and the Macedonian prime minister, Zoran Zaev, inspect an honour
guard during a welcome ceremony in front of the Government Building in Skopje.
Photograph: Georgi Licovski/EPA

block-time published-time 2.44pm BST

This is from HuffPost's Paul Waugh.

enltrBig news in Lab circles: Emilie Oldknow just appointed Assistant General
Secretary & Chief Operating Officer of Unison

- Paul Waugh (@paulwaugh) May 17, 2018

Oldknow was the Labour party's executive director for governance, membership and
party services, effectively the most senior official in the party after the
general secretary, until she resigned earlier this year. She is married to Jon
Ashworth, the shadow health secretary.

block-time published-time 2.21pm BST

Dominic Cummings published a blog this week in which he explained his decision
not to give evidence to the Commons culture committee. (See 1.36pm.) He said
lawyers had told him to "keep my trap shut" until the Electoral Commission
completes its investigation into Vote Leave this summer.

He said he had been willing to give evidence to the committee after this date,
but the MPs' decision to issue a formal summons via the media showed their
priority was "grandstanding PR, not truth-seeking".

Cummings said he believed select committees should have the legal power to
compel witnesses to attend. However, since no such law was in place, he said, he
would not now give evidence "under any circumstances".

The committee system needed reforming to include "processes that push them
towards truth-seeking behaviour rather than the usual trivialising
grandstanding," he said. "So far the inquiry on fake news has helped spread fake
news across the world."

block-time published-time 2.14pm BST

Scotland got happier in 2017, but not rest of UK, says ONS

Readers sometimes complain that Politics Live, and especially all the news it
contains about Brexit, makes them feel depressed. The excellent Bridget Christie
even once included a joke to that effect, mentioning the blog (and
auto-eroticism - don't ask) in her Radio 4 comedy show.

But it turns out that, for the population as a whole, the last 12 months haven't
been so awful after all. The Office for National Statistics has today published
its annual survey of wellbeing and it says that "average ratings of happiness
and feeling that the things done in life are worthwhile have slightly increased
in the UK".

But the headline conclusion is misleading. Scotland is getting happier, and that
is why the overall UK figures have nudged up a bit. In England, Wales and
Northern Ireland we're no happier.

Between the years ending December 2016 and 2017, improvements in worthwhile and
happiness ratings in the UK were driven by Scotland, where average (mean)
ratings also improved. Interestingly, average life satisfaction ratings also
improved for Scotland; however, there were no significant changes for ratings of
anxiety. No overall changes were reported for any measure of personal well-being
in England, Wales or Northern Ireland.

Sadly, the ONS report doesn't explain what was different about Scotland in 2017.

The ONS tracks wellbeing by surveying people and looking at four measures: Are
you satisfied with your life? Are the things you do worthwhile? How happy are
you? And how anxious are you?

Loch Ness in Scotland. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian

block-time published-time 1.53pm BST

Sturgeon rules out giving all Scottish prisoners right to vote

Nicola Sturgeon has ruled out giving all prison inmates in Scotland the right to
vote, rejecting a recommendation from Holyrood's equalities committee earlier
this week.

Sturgeon was pressed to respond to its report at first minister's questions on
Thursday and hinted that she could back limited voting rights, which would not
extend to those jailed for the "most serious and heinous crimes."

Scottish National party, Labour and Lib Dem MSPs on the committee said extending
the franchise to all prisoners, regardless of sentence, would improve
rehabilitation rates and reinstill a sense of citizenship amongst inmates. Two
Tory MSPs on the committee opposed them.

Sturgeon and the then first minister Alex Salmond had emphatically rejected
calls for inmates to be given a vote in the 2014 independence referendum.
Holyrood was subsequently given new powers over setting the rules for council,
Holyrood and EU elections in 2016.

Sturgeon said she accepted that meant Holyrood had to decide how it would
implement numerous European court rulings that the UK's total ban on prisoners
voting breached the convention on human rights (ECHR). She added, however:

I'm not of the view that this should lead to the enfranchising of all prisoners
and I am, to say the least, sceptical that complying with the ECHR requires all
prisoners to have the right to vote.

Holyrood's deep divisions on this issue were highlighted when Murdo Fraser, a
senior Scottish Tory, asked Sturgeon to agree John Muir, a victims campaigner
whose son Damian was stabbed to death, who said it was an "obscenity" this was
being considered.

Sturgeon sympathised, but  John Finnie, a former SNP MSP and former policeman
now with the Scottish Greens, told her Scotland should strive to match the
progressive stance of Nordic countries which had substantial voting rights for
prisoners.

Nicola Sturgeon at first minister's questions Photograph: Ken Jack -
Corbis/Corbis via Getty Images

block-time published-time 1.36pm BST

Dominic Cummings faces being found guilty of 'contempt of parliament'

Dominic Cummings, campaign director for Vote Leave during the EU referendum
campaign, is on course to be found guilty of a contempt of parliament. The
Commons culture committee has been asking him to give evidence to its fake news
inquiry, he has been saying no (or at least, not now), and today the committee
has announced that it will report him to the Commons for contempt of parliament.

But Alexander Nix, the former Cambridge Analytica boss who was also refusing
invitations to appear, has now, having been issued with a summons, agreed that
he will appear before the committee, on Wednesday 6 June.

Damian Collins, the committee chair, said:

We are disappointed that Dominic Cummings has not responded positively to our
requests for him to appear. His reasoning that he must delay giving evidence due
to ongoing investigations simply does not hold up, considering that Alexander
Nix, Jeff Silvester and others involved have agreed to cooperate with the
committee's investigations despite currently being subject to various
investigations.

Reporting the matter to the House is a first step which could result in a
decision that a contempt of parliament has been committed, a very serious
outcome for the individual.

After the matter gets formally reported to the House, the committee of
privileges has to investigate. If it decides Cummings is guilty of a contempt
(and it is hard to see why it shouldn't), it will get MPs to pass a motion
censuring him. This happened two years ago when two former News International
executives were found in contempt of parliament for misleading a committee.

Collins says being found guilty of contempt would be "a very serious outcome"
for Cummings. On this point, he is probably wrong.

It was different in the past when people could get fined, or even imprisoned,
for contempt. This is from a report (pdf) on the topic published six years ago.

The Houses' power to punish non-members for contempt is untested in recent
times. In theory, both Houses can summon a person to the bar of the House to
reprimand them or order a person's imprisonment. In addition, the House of Lords
is regarded as possessing the power to fine non-members. The House of Commons
last used its power to fine in 1666 and this power may since have lapsed.

In 1978 the House of Commons resolved to exercise its penal jurisdiction as
sparingly as possible and only when satisfied that it was essential to do so in
order to provide reasonable protection for the House, its members or its
officers from improper obstruction or interference with the performance of their
functions. Since that resolution, the Commons has not punished a nonmember.
There is no equivalent resolution in the House of Lords, but the House has not
punished a non-member since the nineteenth century.

The Commons has not locked anyone up for contempt since the 19th century and,
even if the power still exists in theory, lawyers argue it would be hard to
square with the Human Rights Act. It also has not summoned any non-MP to the bar
of the Commons for a reprimand since this happened to the Sunday Express editor
John Junor in 1957 - although, if this were to happen to Cummings, this would
make a good scene when Benedict Cumberbatch plays him in the Brexit drama.

Being found guilty of contempt does have a reputational impact, and that is why
Nix probably agreed to appear before the committee after being summoned, as did
Rupert Murdoch seven years ago. But Murdoch and Nix are both business figures,
operating in an environment where adherence with regulatory standards is seen as
important. Cummings is best known as a political adviser famous for wanting to
disrupt the establishment.

Cummings and "contempt of parliament"? It is not so much a punishment as a
description of his mindset.

Dominic Cummings Photograph: David Levenson/Getty Images

block-time published-time 12.40pm BST

My colleague  Jennifer Rankin says EU sources have their concerns about the UK
government's reported plan to effectively extend customs union membership.

enltrEU sources cautious on pos Brexit customs union climbdown and
unsurprisingly want to see proposals. One concern is that gov just playing for
time and still pinning homes on customs p/ship ( aka "magical thinking") or
max-fac ("less useful than a deodorant"). https://t.co/r2iV8cQDMZ

- Jennifer Rankin (@JenniferMerode) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 12.36pm BST

Brokenshire announces consultation on banning combustible cladding after
Grenfell Tower fire

Here is my colleague Robert Booth 's story on the Judith Hackitt review of
building regulations published this morning in response to the Grenfell Tower
fire.

Related:  Grenfell review condemns 'race to the bottom' in building safety
practices

Hackitt did not recommend an outright ban on the use of combustible material for
cladding.

But  James Brokenshire, the housing secretary, who is making a statement on this
to MPs now, has just said that the government will consult on banning
combustible cladding.

enltrHousing Secretary James Brokenshire announces consultation on banning
dangerous cladding - not proposed by Dame Judith in her report on
#GrenfellTowerFirehttps://t.co/L7qXelEusK

- BBC Parliament (@BBCParliament) May 17, 2018

But John Healey, the shadow housing secretary, said a consultation was not
enough. The government should ban it now, he said.

block-time published-time 12.28pm BST

Conservative MPs back prospects of effectively extending customs union
membership if necessary

Here are two more Conservative MPs backing the idea of effectively extending
customs union membership beyond the transition.

From Nick Boles, the former minister who voted remain

enltrNot sure if this is what was agreed but it sounds like a sensible and
pragmatic way forward. #brexitthatworkshttps://t.co/CRjzZQeb2o

- Nick Boles MP (@NickBoles) May 16, 2018

From Geoffrey Cox, who voted leave

enltrThis makes sense if accurate and we can live with it. Pragmatic compromise
will be necessary to achieve the end we fought for. https://t.co/CXIFOr8jcc via
@Telegraph

- Geoffrey Cox QC MP (@Geoffrey_Cox) May 16, 2018

See 9.33am and 11.58am for other Tories backing the idea.

block-time published-time 12.09pm BST

More from Sky's  Faisal Islam on government customs policy.

enltrGovernment policy stated at the Lancaster House speech last year by the PM
was: "I do not want us to be bound by the Common External Tariff"... Asked if
this is still policy, they're getting back to me. pic.twitter.com/Trl946ZbU1

- Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) May 17, 2018

enltrPerhaps one might argue there is a difference between *the* Common External
tariff and *a* external tariff that is common (& temporary) and choosing out o
free will to apply it and being "bound" by it...

- Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 12.05pm BST

Theresa May  also had a meeting in Sofia this morning with Angela Merkel, the
German chancellor, and  Emmanuel Macron, the French president. Over a rather
nice breakfast, by the look of it.

Here is the readout Number 10 released afterwards. A spokesperson said:

In a trilateral meeting in the margins of the Western Balkans Summit in Sofia,
Prime Minister Theresa May met with Chancellor Merkel and President Macron to
discuss the decision by the US to withdraw from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPoA).

The leaders reiterated their firm commitment to ensuring the deal is upheld,
stressing it is important for our shared security. They pledged to work with the
remaining parties to the deal to this end.

The leaders stressed that Iran must continue to meet its own obligations under
the deal.

The leaders reiterated their concerns about Iran's ballistic missile programme
and its regional activities, which clearly contribute to the destabilisation of
its neighbours. They restated their commitment to tackling these issues.

French President Macron, British Prime Minister May and German Chancellor Merkel
meeting before the EU-Western Balkans Summit in Sofia.  Photograph: Stoyan
Nenov/Reuters

block-time published-time 11.58am BST

Stephen Hammond, the pro-European Conservative MP, and one of the 12 Tories who
rebelled on the EU withdrawal bill in December, has said he would be in favour
of effectively keeping the UK in the customs union beyond December 2020.

enltrAlways sceptical of newspaper stories BUT if headline in D Tel right, this
would be a sensible move. UK plc needs to have certainty and protect jobs so
being ' tied ' to Customs Union is a pragmatic solution

- Stephen Hammond MP (@S_Hammond) May 17, 2018

And Anna Soubry, another Tory pro-European who rebelled in December, posted this
comment on Hammond's tweet.

enltrIt also provides part of the solution to a hard border between
#NIreland#Ireland#Brexithttps://t.co/uS6WWtOBsE

- Anna Soubry MP (@Anna_Soubry) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 11.50am BST

As Sky's Faisal Islam  points out, at the Downing Street lobby briefing the
prime minister's spokesperson did not entirely knock down the Telegraph/Politico
Europe Brexit customs story. (See 9.24am.)

enltrNumber 10 repeatedly asked if the UK will be subject to the EU's Common
External Tarrif after end of transition period - answers repeatedly that we are
leaving the Customs Union

- Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) May 17, 2018

enltrNumber 10 repeats the PM's words that we will be free to implement trade
deals after end 2020 - I pointed out that Turkey is free to implement trade
deals at the moment, but those are constrained by the common tariff

- Faisal Islam (@faisalislam) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 11.37am BST

And here's a blog on the possibility of customs union membership being extended
from the BBC's political editor, Laura Kuenssberg. And here's an extract.

No 10 is strikingly adamant that their goal is making one of their plans work so
that the backstop is not required and, importantly, the PM can avoid a huge hit
to her political credibility.

She has said more times than I can remember that the UK is leaving the customs
union and won't be in "a" customs union.

For her to therefore argue overtly for an extension to the customs union is
deeply unpalatable - and senior government figures suggest it just can't happen.

However, given the political difficulties of reaching a compromise, as we've
discussed for the last few weeks, it is the view of at least four cabinet
ministers that extending the existing customs arrangements might be the only
thing that breaks the deadlock.

block-time published-time 11.10am BST

Theresa May has held a meeting with Donald Tusk, president of the European
council, and Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European commission, at the
EU meeting in Sofia this morning.

Theresa May meeting with Donald Tusk, president of the European council (right)
and Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European commission (second from
right) Photograph: Stoyan Nenov/Reuters

She also had a bilateral with her Irish opposite number Leo Varadkar.

Theresa May (left) and Leo Varadkar (right) in Sofia. Photograph: Virginia
Mayo/AP

block-time published-time 11.02am BST

In business questions the SNP's Pete Wishart  asked for an assurance that, when
the EU withdrawal bill does come back to the Commons, the government would allow
proper time for debate. He said he was worried that the government might try to
minimise the number of votes by lumping various amendments together.

Leadsom said the government would allow "ample time" for debate when MPs
considered the Lords amendments.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.04am BST

block-time published-time 11.00am BST

Leadsom refuses to tell MPs when EU withdrawal bill will return to Commons

In business questions in the Commons Andrea Leadsom, the leader of the Commons,
announced the business for next week. There is time for consideration of Lords
amendments on Tuesday and Wednesday, but she did not say whether the EU
withdrawal bill will be debated in these slots.

enltrThe business for the week commencing 21 May will include:
pic.twitter.com/EvXdsGoASx

- Leader's Office (@CommonsLeader) May 17, 2018

Valerie Vaz, the shadow leader of the Commons, asked for clarification. But
Leadsom refused to say whether the EU withdrawal bill would be debated by MPs
next week. Instead she all she said was that the bill would come back to the
Commons "in due course" once the government had considered all the amendments
passed in the Lords. She told MPs:

We will come forward with the return of the EU withdrawal bill once we've had
the opportunity to fully consider and take into account the views expressed by
the other place [the Lords], and to look at what that means in this place. We
will bring those forward in due course.

Fifteen of those amendments were government defeats. The government has to
decide if it is going to try to overturn all or just some of them. And, when the
votes come, there will be a serious risk of defeat, because Tory rebels may line
up with the opposition on some amendments.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.19am BST

block-time published-time 10.36am BST

Irish PM says without 'substantial progress' by June Brexit withdrawal agreement
at risk

Leo Varadkar, the Irish prime minister, has said that without "real and
substantial progress" in the Brexit talks by the time of the EU summit in June,
there could be no withdrawal agreement. He told the Irish Times:

If we are not making real and substantial progress by June then we need to
seriously question whether we're going to have a withdrawal agreement at all. We
stand by the text of the withdrawal agreement and the text of the protocol
published in March as does the taskforce and the 27 member states that are
behind us.

The withdrawal agreement is the one that is due to by agreed by October. The EU
has already published a draft (pdf) of the treaty, and 75% of it is agreed, but
important issues have yet to be resolved, particularly relating to the Irish
border.

Leo Varadkar speaks with the media as he arrives for a meeting of EU and Western
Balkan leaders in Sofia, Bulgaria. Photograph: Virginia Mayo/AP

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.42am BST

block-time published-time 10.02am BST

ITV's political editor Robert Peston has written an interesting post on the
Telegraph/Politico Europe customs union story (see 9.24am) on his Facebook page.
Here's an excerpt.

Now for the avoidance of doubt, although this is a significant victory for May
over the arch Brexiters in her government, it solves very little of substance in
respect of the passionate arguments over what Brexit should be in practice.

Remember this backstop is supposed to be a bridge from 2020 to whatever our
permanent new customs arrangement with the EU will be. It is not a choice
between NCP (being the EU's tariff collector forever) or Max Fac (tech solutions
to prevent border checks). That decision is yet to be made - though all my money
is on Max Fac being the eventual choice.

But perhaps more importantly, I simply cannot see this backstop being deemed
adequate by the EU27 unless it is accompanied by a pledge from the UK to
maintain full alignment with the EU's product and food standards for just as
long as the backstop is needed (I should point out here that the PM retains a
hope that all new customs systems could be in place by the end of 2020, and the
backstop would then be academic - but few UK or EU officials agree with her).

block-time published-time 9.33am BST

Damian Green says he would back extending customs union membership if necessary

Damian Green, the former first secretary of state until his resignation in
December, has used Twitter to say he would support staying in the customs union
beyond December 2020 if extra time is needed to get new arrangements in place.

enltrSurely the point about a new customs arrangement is that it needs to work
smoothly from day one, or we will have chaos on the roads, especially in Kent.
If that means a small delay, so be it.

- Damian Green (@DamianGreen) May 17, 2018

Green is MP for a Kent constituency, Ashford.

block-time published-time 9.24am BST

May denies U-turn amid reports UK could effectively stay in customs union after
transition

Theresa May is in Sofia in Bulgaria this morning for an EU-Western Balkans
summit and this morning she has dismissed (sort of) reports that the government
is planning a post-Brexit customs compromise that would effectively keep the UK
in the customs union after December 2020, when the transition period is due to
end.

The Daily Telegraph has splashed on the story (paywall) and Politico Europe has
got its own, very similar tale.

enltrTELEGRAPH: May 'outguns' Brexiteers with Plan for customs ties after 2021
#tomorrowspaperstodaypic.twitter.com/v1sZ7j2YC1

- Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) May 16, 2018

Here's an extract from the Telegraph story by  Steven Swinford.

Britain will tell Brussels it is prepared to stay tied to the customs union
beyond 2021 as ministers remain deadlocked over a future deal with the EU, the
Telegraph has learned...

Ministers signed off the plans on Tuesday despite objections from Boris Johnson,
the Foreign Secretary, and Michael Gove, the Environment Secretary. A
pro-European cabinet source said that Mr Johnson and Mr Gove were "outgunned"
during the meeting and reluctantly accepted the plans.

The Brexit sub-committee reached a consensus that Britain will stay aligned to
the customs union if highly complex technology needed to operate borders after
Brexit is not ready. Officials have warned it may not be in place until 2023.

Sources said that the new Irish "backstop" will be strictly "time-limited" and
make clear that Britain will be free to implement trade deals.

And here is an extract from the Politico Europe story by Tom McTague and  David
Herszenhorn.

When is a customs union not a customs union? When it's a "time-limited goods
arrangement."

With the Cabinet at odds over the U.K. government's preferred option for a
post-Brexit customs arrangement, officials are exploring a new option that could
provide "a bridge" to a deal.

Instead of moving immediately to the eventual post-Brexit customs scheme at the
end of the transition period on January 1, 2021, the U.K. could agree to
temporarily remain inside the EU's common external tariff until a future customs
arrangement is ready, according to three senior officials involved in the Brexit
negotiations from both the U.K. and EU.

May was asked about this in Sofia this morning. Asked if the UK was climbing
down over leaving the customs union, she insisted it wasn't. She said:

No we are not [climbing down]. The United Kingdom will be leaving the customs
union, we are leaving the European Union.

Of course we will be negotiating future customs arrangements with the European
Union and I have set three objectives, the government has three objectives in
those.

We need to be able to have our own independent trade policy, we want as
friction-less a border between the UK and the EU so that trade can continue and
we want to ensure there is no hard border between Northern Ireland and Ireland.

You'll notice that she did not deny the substance of the story at all - just the
suggestion that it amounted to a policy reversal.

Theresa May (centre) with the German chancellor Angela and the French president
Emmanuel Macron at the EU-Western Balkans summit in Sofia, Bulgaria. Photograph:
Darko Vojinovic/AP

Other Tories may not be quite so sanguine about this. This is what Jacob
Rees-Mogg, the chair of the European Research Group, the 60-strong group of Tory
MPs pushing for a harder Brexit, told the Telegraph.

The risk of the government using all its mental energy on the fallback position
is that they create a position that is more attractive than a permanent deal.

We have gone from a clear end point, to an extension, to a proposed further
extension with no end point. The horizon seems to be unreachable. The bottom of
the rainbow seems to be unattainable. People voted to leave, they did not vote
for a perpetual purgatory.

We'll hear a lot more on this as the day goes on.

Here is the agenda for the day.

9.30am:  Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, takes questions in the
Commons.

9.30am:  The government review of building regulations ordered after the
Grenfell Tower fire will be published. As Robert Booth and Peter Walker report,
it will not recommend an explicit ban on combustible cladding and insulation,
despite persistent demands from Grenfell Tower survivors and fire safety
experts.

9.30am:  The Office for National Statistics publishes data on personal
wellbeing.

Around 11.30am: Tracey Crouch, the culture minister, gives a Commons statement
on the government's decision, announced at 7am, to cut the maximum permitted
stake on fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs) will be cut from £100 to £2.

Around 12.30pm : James Brokenshire, the housing secretary, gives a Commons
statement on the buildings regulation review.

Afternoon: Theresa May is due to hold a press conference in Macedonia, which she
is visiting after an EU summit in Bulgaria.

4.30pm: Fox gives an interview to LBC.

As usual, I will be covering breaking political news as it happens, as well as
bringing you the best reaction, comment and analysis from the web. I plan to
post a summary at lunchtime and another in the afternoon.

You can read all today's Guardian politics stories here.

Here is the Politico Europe round-up of this morning's political news from Jack
Blanchard. And here is the PoliticsHome list of today' top 10 must reads.

If you want to follow me or contact me on Twitter, I'm on @AndrewSparrow.

I try to monitor the comments BTL but normally I find it impossible to read them
all. If you have a direct question, do include "Andrew" in it somewhere and I'm
more likely to find it. I do try to answer direct questions, although sometimes
I miss them or don't have time.

If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use
Twitter.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.13am BST

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              92 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 17, 2018 Thursday 9:17 AM GMT

Theresa May denies customs union climbdown;
PM speaks after reports she was preparing for UK to remain in customs union
after 2021

BYLINE: Anne Perkins, Daniel Boffey in Sofia and Jennifer Rankin in Brussels

SECTION: POLITICS; Version:3

LENGTH: 1041 words


Theresa May has denied climbing down over membership of the customs union after
Britain leaves the EU.

The prime minister spoke after the Telegraph reported that she was preparing for
Britain to remain in the customs union after 2021 as the row over the Irish
border continues.

May arrived at the EU western Balkans summit in the Bulgarian capital, Sofia,
with the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and the French president, Emmanuel
Macron, after a meeting with the two leaders.

She said: "No, we are not [climbing down]. The United Kingdom will be leaving
the customs union, we are leaving the European Union. Of course we will be
negotiating future customs arrangements with the European Union and I have set
three objectives; the government has three objectives in those.

"We need to be able to have our own independent trade policy, we want as
frictionless a border [as possible] between the UK and the EU so that trade can
continue and we want to ensure there is no hard border between Northern Ireland
and Ireland."

Downing Street sources earlier dismissed reports that the Brexit war cabinet had
agreed that the UK would have to stay in the customs union for an extended
period if there is to be is no hard Irish border.

The reports emerged as peers finally gave the EU withdrawal bill a third
reading, but not before inflicting a 15th defeat on the government. The future
of the bill is now uncertain as the government tries to estimate the risk of
irreversible defeats in the Commons.

With the cabinet still deadlocked over the best way forward on the future
relationship with the UK's biggest trading partner, pressure is mounting. Before
the EU summit at the end of June, a way has to be found to satisfy EU
negotiators that the UK proposals can avoid the "backstop" solution of Northern
Ireland remaining part of the EU's trading arrangements.

According to the Daily Telegraph, ministers, including the leading Brexiters
Boris Johnson and Michael Gove "reluctantly" accepted at Tuesday's inner Brexit
cabinet committee that there would have to be an extended period of membership
of the customs union for the whole UK while technology is developed to monitor
the border without imposing more permanent structures at the 270 crossing points
that exist between Ireland and Northern Ireland.

But one source dismissed the reports, saying: "There was no proposal discussed
or agreed that would see us staying in the customs union beyond the
implementation period."

The period of transition is scheduled to end in December 2020. Technically, it
would be possible to extend it, although that would have to be agreed by the EU
as part of the withdrawal agreement, which has to be finalised by this autumn.

The proposal would be bitterly opposed by the Brexiters outside cabinet. On
Thursday the former Tory leader and leading leave campaigner Iain Duncan Smith
said it would be "very unwise" to extend membership of the customs union, and he
warned against believing that everything had to be perfect before the point of
departure.

"Perfection on departure is idiotic. Functionality is required and that already
exists," Duncan Smith said.

But the contours of a "third way" between Theresa May's customs partnership, in
which the UK would act as the EU's tax collector, and "max fac", where
technology and trader status would be used to ensure a customs border was
invisibly enforced - both dismissed by Brussels - is being talked of more and
more widely.

Sources at the Department for Exiting the EU also denied the Telegraph report
and said policy was still in development. But one possibility would be to remain
inside the common external tariff while the details and functionality of a new
arrangement are hammered out.

However, that would mean that the UK would also be bound by EU trade rules and
trade policy. It would be impossible to sign off on new free trade agreements
with third countries.

EU officials in Brussels think a possible delay in leaving the customs union
could be a sign of "more realistic" thinking from the UK. "We would cautiously
welcome this as a first step but would have some questions," one EU diplomat
said. "If it's only a play for time, that's our concern. You can't build a
future relationship on soft assumptions."

The big question for Brussels is whether the UK would be using a delay to buy
time for options the EU deems unworkable, while sliding back on promise to avoid
a hard border on the island of Ireland. The government has promised twice that
if no other solutions are found, it will sign up to the EU "backstop".

"The yardstick [for any new proposal] will be does it work for Ireland and does
it work for the EU," said and EU source, stressing that member states had not
been presented with the details. "Whatever happens, it needs to deliver
permanent certainty that there will be no hard border."

There are further complications associated with trying to remain in part of the
EU trade system, where the standards underpinned by the single market as well as
the common external tariff are integral parts. It is unlikely that Brussels
would accept short-term, partial membership of the trading system.

Speaking at the summit of EU leaders in Sofia, Dalia Grybauskaite, the
Lithuanian president, reflected the view of the EU that the UK would not be able
to stay in a customs union alone with Brussels beyond the transition period.

She said: "I think that negotiations are about the whole package we cannot
separate any pieces. Everything will be finally negotiated after it is finally
negotiated."

Continuing access to the EU single market and membership of the customs union
beyond 2021 would raise complex legal problems, unless it was treated as part of
the withdrawal agreement. The UK would be obliged to continue making
contributions to the EU budget, which would be anathema to many Brexiters.

However, there is a growing realisation that a deal described as "temporary"
that was acceptable to Dublin - which has an effective veto on any deal - and
that averted the potentially chaotic imposition of customs checks at every UK
point of entry may be the least bad option.

The future of the withdrawal bill may become clearer later on Thursday when
government business for the next 10 days is announced.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              93 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 17, 2018 Thursday 8:11 AM GMT

Brent crude oil hits $80 per barrel and pushes FTSE 100 to record close - as it
happened;
All the day's economic and financial news, as energy prices hit fresh three and
a half-year highsFTSE 100 hits record closing highBrent crude smashed through
$80 a barrelIntroduction: Total will quit Iranian gas fields without sanctions
waiverMove undermines Europe's efforts to preserve Iranian nuclear deal Macron
calls for protection for EU companiesShipping giant also planning to quit Iran

BYLINE: Graeme Wearden (until 2.15pm) and Nick Fletcher

SECTION: BUSINESS; Version:16

LENGTH: 6732 words


block-time published-time 5.21pm BST

European markets end higher as oil surges

As the FTSE 100 hit a record closing high amid the oil price rise, other
European markets were also in positive territory. On the UK, Laith Khalaf,
senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said:

A stronger dollar, a rising oil price and the postponement of an interest rate
rise can all claim some credit for the recent strong showing from the stock
market.

The final scores showed:


     ·    The FTSE 100 finished up 53.77 points or 0.7% at 7787.97
     ·    Germany's Dax rose 0.91% to 13,114.61
     ·    France's Cac climbed 0.98% to 5621.92
     ·    Italy's FTSE MIB added 0.29% to 23,801.99
     ·    Spain's Ibex ended up 1.04% at 10,216.4


But on Wall Street the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently up 16 points or
0.07%.

And Brent crude continues to hold onto much of its gains, thanks to the threat
of reduced supplies from Iran after the US withdrew from the nuclear deal. It is
up 1.27% at $80.29 a barrel.

On that note, it's time to close for the day. Thanks for all your comments, and
we'll be back tomorrow.

block-time published-time 4.36pm BST

FTSE 100 hits new closing high

The rise in the oil price has helped push the FTSE 100 to a new closing high.

The UK's leading index has been in fairly positive mood recently, along with
other markets, after hopes that the US and China could resolve their trade
differences. The continuing strength of the dollar against the pound has also
been supporting the market, given the FTSE 100 is packed full of overseas
earners which benefit when sterling is weaker.

Brent's surge to $80 has given the index its final push to a new record close of
7787.97, up 0.7%. However it is still just below the intra-day record of 7792.56
set on 12 January this year.

Meanwhile the FTSE 250 did hit a new peak, helped by the extraordinary jump in
Ocado shares.

block-time published-time 3.57pm BST

Fiona Cincotta, senior market analyst at City Index, also thinks Brent could hit
$100 a barrel:

Fundamentally the price looks well supported here, OPEC are showing they are in
no rush to end production cuts, Venezuela's oil industry is collapsing under its
economic and political crisis and US sanctions aimed at Iran's oil industry are
kicking in. Whilst US production is a constraint on the price, right now this is
overshadowed by the Iran Venezuela shortfall.

Could oil go higher? Venezuela's problems are unlikely to be resolved anytime
soon and could be exasperated if the Trump aims sanctions at the troubled
country following rigged and unfair elections; also if the US can get China to
loosen energy ties with Iran, then regardless of increased US shale production,
the price could close in on $100.

block-time published-time 3.34pm BST

Brent crude is currently up 0.86% at $79.96 a barrel, having earlier risen as
high as $80.18.

And the FTSE 100's energy companies are benefiting from the rise and helping to
lift the leading index close to its record high. It is up 0.4% at 7767, around
25 points below its peak. Connor Campbell, financial analyst at Spreadex, said:

It took a while, but the FTSE finally become receptive to Brent Crude's latest
rise, lifting the UK index that bit closer to a fresh all-time high.....Though
not much has changed with Brent Crude - it is still dancing about the $80 per
barrel mark - comments from Total CEO Patrick Pouyanne that the black stuff
could hit $100 in the coming months if oil companies aren't given waivers by the
US to work in Iran helped boost BP and Shell, in turn lifting the FTSE higher.

block-time published-time 3.13pm BST

My colleague Adam Vaughan has been looking at the reasons behind the surge in
oil prices:

Related:  What are the factors driving up the price of crude oil?

block-time published-time 3.00pm BST

Another voice adding to those suggesting oil has much further to climb.
Following news that Total will quit Iran unless it gets a waiver from the US,
the boss of the French energy giant has predicted crude at $100 a barrel:

enltr #BREAKING Total CEO says oil price could hit $100 'in coming months'

- AFP news agency (@AFP) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 2.37pm BST

Wall Street opens lower

Worries about the trade talks between the US and China, along with President
Trump's withdrawal from the Iranian nuclear deal, continue to unsettle US equity
investors.

Add to that US bond yields hitting a new seven year high and a disappointing
update from Cisco, and Wall Street has opened in negative territory. The Dow
Jones Industrial Average is currently down 26 points or 0.1% while the S&P 500
and Nasdaq Composite slipped by similar amounts at the open.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.38pm BST

block-time published-time 2.31pm BST

Back with Iran and the US sanctions which have driven up the oil price to above
$80 a barrel, and Europe is prepared to defend its businesses from the fallout.
Reuters reports:

The European Union will stick to the Iran deal and the bloc's leaders have
mandated their Brussels-based executive to defend the interests of European
companies dealing with Tehran from U.S. sanctions if needed, a top EU official
said.

"On the Iran nuclear deal, we agreed unanimously that the EU will stay in the
agreement as long as Iran remains fully committed to it. Additionally the
Commission was given a green light to be ready to act whenever European
interests are affected," the chairman of a two-day EU leaders' summit in the
Bulgarian capital, Donald Tusk, told a news conference.

The head of the bloc's executive European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, told
the same conference that the EU was ready to start trade liberalisation talks
with the United States in some areas if Washington gives permanent exemptions
from aluminum and steel tariffs.

Tusk Photograph: Stoyan Nenov/Reuters

block-time published-time 2.15pm BST

Over in the US, weekly jobless claims have risen by more than expected.

The number of Americans claiming unemployment benefit increased to 222,000 from
211,000 the previous week, higher than the forecast 215,000. But the four week
average fell to 213,250 from 216,000, according to the Labor Department, the
lowest level for this average since December 13, 1969 when it was 210,750.

block-time published-time 2.00pm BST

"Bots" are seen operating on Ocado's "smart platform" at the its customer
fulfilment centre in Andover. Photograph: Peter Nicholls/Reuters

Elsewhere in the markets, shares in online supermarket retailer Ocado have shot
through the roof after it finally landed a major international deal.

Ocado has been promising a big overseas tie-up for literally years, and today it
delivered thanks to an alliance with US grocer giant Kroger.

Kroger will used Ocado's technology to upgrade its warehouse operations,
automation, logistics and delivery route planning in the US. This should
strengthen its hand in the battle against Amazon, as grocers look to automate
their systems and use robots to speed up processes and cut costs.

Ocado's shares have rocketed by up to 75% today, as traders bet that this deal
is as transformation as Kroger claims. That drove its value up from around
£3.7bn to £6bn, enough to get into the FTSE 100.

Related:  US deal boosts Ocado's stock market value to £6bn

It's a disaster for the hedge funds who have been short-selling Ocado's shares,
betting that it would fail to achieve international expansion.

As Neil Wilson of  Markets.com  explains, Ocado now seems to have real momentum.

Bagging a giant US retailer is a major coup for [Ocado CEO] Tim Steiner and as
previously noted, we should see many more deals. Shares are priced for these
deals to be coming thick and fast.

block-time published-time 1.09pm BST

Peter Kiernan of the Economist Intelligence Unit say's Total's (likely)
withdrawal from Iran shows that Donald Trump's sanctions could have a serious
impact on the Iranian economy.

Kiernan explains:

The announcement by Total that that it will leave South Pars 11, unless it is
granted a waiver from US secondary sanctions, reflects the likelihood that
European energy companies with exposure to the American market or financial
system will be unwilling to risk US penalties by deciding to participate in
Iran's oil and gas sector.

Iran will seek alternative sources of investment, such as Chinese companies, to
get the funds it requires to develop its energy sector instead, but Iran's
likely inability to attract major European companies going forward will be a
setback.

The Total announcement also gives notice to the difficulties that European
policymakers could face in the longer term as they try to keep Iran itself in
the nuclear agreement. If investment in Iran does dry up and Iran's oil exports
are significantly cut, both due to US pressures, it will make Europe's role in
keeping the nuclear deal alive more problematic.

block-time published-time 12.35pm BST

China could replace Total in Iran

China is poised to step in if France's Total does indeed pull out of the Iranian
South Pars 11 gas field project (as seems likely).

Iran's oil minister, Bijan Namdar Zanganeh, has revealed that state-owned
Chinese oil firm CNPC is waiting in the wings, if needed.

Zanganeh said:

"Total has said that if it doesn't get an exemption from the United States to
continue its work, it will begin to pull out of the deal.

If that happens, the Chinese firm CNPC will replace Total."

enltrIran's oil minister says Chinese state-owned oil company CNPC is ready to
replace Total on a major gas field project in Iran if the French energy giant
pulls out: @AFP

- Dmitry Zaks (@dmitryzaksAFP) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 11.55am BST

Given its strong rally over the last year, analysts are wondering how much
higher oil could go.

Morgan Stanley have predicted that Brent will trade at $90 per barrel in 2020,
thanks to increased demand for diesel ( due to new anti-pollution rules on
shipping ) and jet fuel.

Bank of America Merrill Lynch is even more bullish. It estimates that oil could
hit $100 per barrel next year, due to supply constrains from Iran (due to
sanctions) and Venezuela (where political instability could hit supplies).

Francisco Blanch, head of commodities research at BAML, says:

"Looking into the next 18 months, we expect global oil supply and demand
balances to tighten."

block-time published-time 11.16am BST

US crude oil has also hit its highest level since 2014.

It's up nearly 1% at over $72 per barrel, mirroring today's rise in Brent crude
(which is sourced from the North Sea)

enltrUS Crude Oil breaks out again - now above $72 a barrel. Price now up +70%
in last 11 months. 3.5 year highs. pic.twitter.com/ib5yWWfeIB

- David Jones (@JonesTheMarkets) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 11.13am BST

Rising oil prices are a boost to the world's crude producers, but a blow to
those countries who are net importers of energy.

For them, $80 per barrel oil means higher inflation, and could be bad for growth
if consumers have less disposable income to spend once they've covered their
fuel and energy costs.

Here's some instant reaction:

enltrAs oil prices push through $80 a barrel - up 53% since September. Summer
about to start, yet we're expected to believe that inflation will remain
subdued, and consumer spending won't be affected?

- Michael Hewson ???? (@mhewson_CMC) May 17, 2018

enltrBrent crude is now trading at over $80 per barrel for the first time in
four years, after the US broke the #Iran nuclear deal and Total said it would
likely withdraw from its South Pars commitments due to US sanctions
pic.twitter.com/daedut3hV1

- Patrick Galey (@patrickgaley) May 17, 2018

enltr #BrentCrude oil roses to $80 per barrel ( first time since Nov 2014).. big
-ve for Indian equity markets & currency.. to weigh on inflation numbers and RBI
monetary policy action.

- Shraddha Babla (@shraddha_babla) May 17, 2018

enltrOh look, U.S. foreign policy appears to be having the completely
coincidental effect of driving oil prices up. Brent crude oil heads towards $80
per barrel as Total threatens to quit Iran - business live
https://t.co/eMFFpKj5Rm

- Chamkaur Ghag (@chamkaurghag) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 10.53am BST

Brent hits $80 after Total's Iran threat

Newsflash: Brent crude has hit $80 per barrel for the first time since November
2014.

The news that Total is planning to withdaw from its large Iran gas field deal
has pushed prices steadily higher this morning.

enltrBrent hits $80 https://t.co/YwZw4AJFuzpic.twitter.com/46ZhlJUUZQ

- Bloomberg Markets (@markets) May 17, 2018

The price of a barrel of Brent crude has now gained more than 16% since early
April, as traders anticipate supply shortages if geopolitical tensions in the
Middle East continue to rise.

Norbert Ruecker, head of macro and commodity research at Julius Baer, says:

"Supply concerns are top of mind after the U.S. left the Iran nuclear deal. The
geopolitical noise and escalation fears are here to stay."

block-time published-time 10.40am BST

Brent crude is moving closer to $80 for the first time since 2014 Photograph:
Bloomberg TV

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.41am BST

block-time published-time 10.33am BST

Now this is interesting.... Iranian state TV is reporting that a British
consortium called Pergas has signed a deal to develop an oil field in the south
of Iran.

Associated Press have the details:

The agreement is the first between Iran and a key Western ally of the United
States since Washington last week announced it will pull out of the landmark
2015 nuclear deal between Iran and Western powers.

Managing Director of Pergas International Consortium Colin Rowley, and Bijan
Alipour, managing director of National Iranian South Oil Co., signed a
preliminary deed on the partnership in the presence of British Ambassador Rob
Macaire in Tehran on Wednesday night.

The project, if the agreement turns into a contract, will require more than $1
billion to produce 200,000 barrels of crude oil per day during the next decade
in the 55-year old Karanj oil filed.

But what about the prospect of US sanctions?

Well....Pergas is clear that its focus is on the "Eastern Hemisphere", with
projects in the Middle East, South East Asia and Africa. It must feel safe from
Washington's threat to ban foreign firms from accessing the entire US banking
and financial system if they deal with Iran.

block-time published-time 10.04am BST

A P Moller-Maersk Group's Eugen Maersk container ship. Photograph: Robert
Francois/AFP/Getty Images

Total isn't alone!  Moller-Maersk, the world's largest shipping firm is also
planning to pull out of Iran.

Moller-Maersk's CEO, Soren Skou, says it will withdraw because of the threat of
sanctions from America on any company which maintains links with the Iranians.

Skou told Reuters:

"With the sanctions the Americans are to impose, you can't do business in Iran
if you also have business in the U.S., and we have that on a large scale.

"I don't know the exact timing details, but I am certain that we're also going
to shut down (in Iran)".

enltrMaersk says U.S. sanctions make doing business in Iran impossible
https://t.co/m5EfsJqpI9

- Reuters Business (@ReutersBiz) May 17, 2018

Skou was speaking after Moller-Maersk reported an "unsatisfactory" underlying
loss of $239m in the last three months. It blamed the rising "geopolitical
risks" and the threat of a trade war for driving down shipping rates.

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.14am BST

block-time published-time 9.33am BST

Macron: Companies need protection against US sanctions     German Chancellor
Angela Merkel, French President Emmanuel Macron and British Prime Minister
Theresa May at the EU-Western Balkans summit in Sofia, Bulgaria today.
Photograph: Darko Vojinovic/AP

French president Emmanuel Macron has weighed in, calling on the European Union
to protect companies who want to keep trading with Iran.

Speaking at an EU summit in Sofia, Bulgaria, Macron said that France backed a
proposal for the EC to protect and compensate European companies hit by US
sanctions.

Called 'blocking sanctions', they could provide a way for Europe to keep the
Iran deal alive.

Asked about Total's threat to quit Iran, Macron told reporters that
multinational companies must make their own decisions - but smaller companies
needed protection to keep operating in Iran if they want to.

"International companies with interests in many countries make their own choices
according to their own interests. They should continue to have this freedom."

But what is important is that companies and especially medium-sized companies
which are perhaps less exposed to other markets, American or others, can make
this choice freely."

block-time published-time 9.13am BST

Brent is creeping higher, and has touched $76.62 per barrel.

block-time published-time 9.05am BST

Oil's push to a new three and a half-year high threatens to keep inflation up,
hitting households and eroding real wages:

enltrCould cause #inflation to be stickier than expected in near term - #Oil
hits highest since Nov 2014 as #Brent edges closer to $80
https://t.co/ekjES4ms5d

- Howard Archer (@HowardArcherUK) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 8.50am BST

Oil is also getting a lift from new data showing that US inventories fell by 1.4
million barrels last week.

That suggests stronger demand for crude stocks - which should push prices
higher.

enltr #Oil heads back towards $80 (3rd time lucky? ??) after @EIAgov shows 1.4m
bbl drop in crude stocks and any worries about the struggles of the physical
markets are overtaken by OPEC/Iran #OOTT#moo ?????? pic.twitter.com/ZTD0sEnPhl

- Amanda Cooper (@a_coops1) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 8.33am BST

enltrBest/worst performers - Commodities today: Oil - US Crude: 0.4% Oil - Brent
Crude: 0.4% Spot Gold: -0.1% Spot Silver: -0.1% pic.twitter.com/fWXiwCsEy6

- DailyFX Team Live (@DailyFXTeam) May 17, 2018

block-time published-time 8.32am BST

Why Total's threat matters

Total's threat to quit its Iran gas project is significant because it shows that
the whole Iranian nuclear deal could unravel.

As well as withdrawing from the agreement this month, president Trump declared
that companies worldwide must stop doing business with Iran or risk US fines or
other punishment.

If Total pulls out, other companies will be more reluctant to invest in Iran - a
blow to President Hassan Rouhani's hopes of attracting new investment.

Rouhani travelled to Davos in 2014 in an attempt to encourage international
firms to invest in Iran; he had hope to attract $200bn of energy infrastructure
investments by 2021.

Sanam Vakil, associate fellow at Chatham House, said Total's announcement was "a
bad sign, adding:

The EU can't compel or really protect the private sector.

Bjarne Schieldrop, an oil analyst at SEB, told the Financial Times that it
undermines Europe's efforts to keep the Iran nuclear deal alive:

"Total's action... backs up the idea that no one sees an easy solution here and
that there is little expectation of US leniency,"

"Whatever the politicians in Europe are saying, the private companies are just
pulling out and folding the cards."

block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.38am BST

block-time published-time 8.05am BST

Introduction: Oil heads towards $80

Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the
financial markets, the eurozone and business.

The oil price is heading towards $80 per barrel for the first time since 2014,
as Donald Trump's decision to impose sanctions on Iran continues to reverberate
through the financial markets.

French energy giant Total announced it would withdraw from a Iranian gas deal
before the end of the year, unless it gets a waiver.

In a statement last night, Total explained:

Total will not continue the SP11 (South Pars 11) project and will have to unwind
all related operations before 4 November 2018, unless Total is granted a
specific project waiver by US authorities with the support of the French and
European authorities.

This looks like a blow to Europe's hopes of keeping its current economic ties
with Iran intact, following America's withdrawal from the Iranian nuclear deal
earlier this month.

The SP11 agreement was signed last July, making Total the first major Western
energy company to invest in the Islamic Republic since sanctions were lifted in
2016.

Now, though, Total is worried that it would be sanctioned by the US authorities
if it kept dealing with Iran. The potential penalties from Washington simply
look unpalatable.

The news sent Brent crude jumping to $79.47, a three and a half-year high. This
puts $80 in traders' sights - and leaving motorists facing higher prices at the
pumps.

enltrPerfect timing for #ThrowbackThursday because we're headed back to the 80s.
Brent is now just 60 cents short of crashing through 80 bucks.
pic.twitter.com/BYTFcF7rkS

- David Ingles (@DavidInglesTV) May 17, 2018

Mihir Kapadia, CEO and founder of  Sun Global Investments, agrees that
geopolitical tensions are driving energy prices higher, with unrest is building
in Venezuela ahead of this weekend's presidential elections.

Related:  Venezuela political prison seized by inmates ahead of presidential
election

Kapadia explains:

Venezuela's situation grows increasingly worrying and the expected drop in
production from Iran means that prices are expected to reach four-year highs
once again.

There are still concerns as to how increasing oil prices will affect the U.S.
and global economy, and with tensions in the Middle East also growing, the next
few months is likely to see the market become highly volatile."

Also coming up today:

Britain's bookmakers are reeling from the news that the maximum stake on their
fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs) must be cut from £100 to £2, in an attempt
to tackle the social damage caused by gambling.

Related:  Maximum stake for fixed-odds betting terminals cut to £2

It's also a busy morning in the City, with estate agent Foxtons warning that the
London property market remains "very challenging", Ocado landing a partnership
with US retailer Kroger, and Mothercare announcing the return of once-sacked CEO
Mark Newton-Jones.

Holiday operator Thomas Cook  and Royal Mail are also updating the market.

enltrThomas Cook hl pre-tax loss narrows; Summer bookings +13% (59% sold), FY
trading in-line.

- Mike van Dulken (@Accendo_Mike) May 17, 2018  The agenda:

     ·    1.30pm BST: US weekly jobless figures
     ·    5pm BST: Bank of England chief economist Andy Haldane speaks in London


block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.07am BST

3006 2018-05-20T07:15:00Z true 2018-05-17T07:11:20Z false false
2018-05-17T16:26:47Z false UK theguardian.com

https://gu.com/p/8jb5g false true
https://media.guim.co.uk/9d37d0c7a6caa29d0622522b99660f5cc39944f5/0_180_5366_322
1/500.jpg false en As the FTSE 100 hit a record closing high amid the oil price
rise, other European markets were also in positive territory. On the UK, Laith
Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: A stronger dollar, a rising
oil price and the postponement of an interest rate rise can all claim some
credit for the recent strong showing from the stock market. The final scores
showed: The FTSE 100 finished up 53.77 points or 0.7% at 7787.97 Germany's Dax
rose 0.91% to 13,114.61 France's Cac climbed 0.98% to 5621.92 Italy's FTSE MIB
added 0.29% to 23,801.99 Spain's Ibex ended up 1.04% at 10,216.4 But on Wall
Street the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently up 16 points or 0.07%. And
Brent crude continues to hold onto much of its gains, thanks to the threat of
reduced supplies from Iran after the US withdrew from the nuclear deal. It is up
1.27% at $80.29 a barrel. On that note, it's time to close for the day. Thanks
for all your comments, and we'll be back tomorrow. The rise in the oil price has
helped push the FTSE 100 to a new closing high. The UK's leading index has been
in fairly positive mood recently, along with other markets, after hopes that the
US and China could resolve their trade differences. The continuing strength of
the dollar against the pound has also been supporting the market, given the FTSE
100 is packed full of overseas earners which benefit when sterling is weaker.
Brent's surge to $80 has given the index its final push to a new record close of
7787.97, up 0.7%. However it is still just below the intra-day record of 7792.56
set on 12 January this year. Meanwhile the FTSE 250 did hit a new peak, helped
by the extraordinary jump in Ocado shares. Fiona Cincotta, senior market analyst
at City Index, also thinks Brent could hit $100 a barrel: Fundamentally the
price looks well supported here, OPEC are showing they are in no rush to end
production cuts, Venezuela's oil industry is collapsing under its economic and
political crisis and US sanctions aimed at Iran's oil industry are kicking in.
Whilst US production is a constraint on the price, right now this is
overshadowed by the Iran Venezuela shortfall. Could oil go higher? Venezuela's
problems are unlikely to be resolved anytime soon and could be exasperated if
the Trump aims sanctions at the troubled country following rigged and unfair
elections; also if the US can get China to loosen energy ties with Iran, then
regardless of increased US shale production, the price could close in on $100.
Brent crude is currently up 0.86% at $79.96 a barrel, having earlier risen as
high as $80.18. And the FTSE 100's energy companies are benefiting from the rise
and helping to lift the leading index close to its record high. It is up 0.4% at
7767, around 25 points below its peak. Connor Campbell, financial analyst at
Spreadex, said: It took a while, but the FTSE finally become receptive to Brent
Crude's latest rise, lifting the UK index that bit closer to a fresh all-time
high.....Though not much has changed with Brent Crude - it is still dancing
about the $80 per barrel mark - comments from Total CEO Patrick Pouyanne that
the black stuff could hit $100 in the coming months if oil companies aren't
given waivers by the US to work in Iran helped boost BP and Shell, in turn
lifting the FTSE higher. My colleague Adam Vaughan has been looking at the
reasons behind the surge in oil prices: Another voice adding to those suggesting
oil has much further to climb. Following news that Total will quit Iran unless
it gets a waiver from the US, the boss of the French energy giant has predicted
crude at $100 a barrel: Worries about the trade talks between the US and China,
along with President Trump's withdrawal from the Iranian nuclear deal, continue
to unsettle US equity investors. Add to that US bond yields hitting a new seven
year high and a disappointing update from Cisco, and Wall Street has opened in
negative territory. The Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently down 26 points
or 0.1% while the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite slipped by similar amounts at the
open. Back with Iran and the US sanctions which have driven up the oil price to
above $80 a barrel, and Europe is prepared to defend its businesses from the
fallout. Reuters reports: The European Union will stick to the Iran deal and the
bloc's leaders have mandated their Brussels-based executive to defend the
interests of European companies dealing with Tehran from U.S. sanctions if
needed, a top EU official said. "On the Iran nuclear deal, we agreed unanimously
that the EU will stay in the agreement as long as Iran remains fully committed
to it. Additionally the Commission was given a green light to be ready to act
whenever European interests are affected," the chairman of a two-day EU leaders'
summit in the Bulgarian capital, Donald Tusk, told a news conference. The head
of the bloc's executive European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, told the same
conference that the EU was ready to start trade liberalisation talks with the
United States in some areas if Washington gives permanent exemptions from
aluminum and steel tariffs. Over in the US, weekly jobless claims have risen by
more than expected. The number of Americans claiming unemployment benefit
increased to 222,000 from 211,000 the previous week, higher than the forecast
215,000. But the four week average fell to 213,250 from 216,000, according to
the Labor Department, the lowest level for this average since December 13, 1969
when it was 210,750. Elsewhere in the markets, shares in online supermarket
retailer Ocado have shot through the roof after it finally landed a major
international deal. Ocado has been promising a big overseas tie-up for literally
years, and today it delivered thanks to an alliance with US grocer giant Kroger.
Kroger will used Ocado's technology to upgrade its warehouse operations,
automation, logistics and delivery route planning in the US. This should
strengthen its hand in the battle against Amazon, as grocers look to automate
their systems and use robots to speed up processes and cut costs. Ocado's shares
have rocketed by up to 75% today, as traders bet that this deal is as
transformation as Kroger claims. That drove its value up from around £3.7bn to
£6bn, enough to get into the FTSE 100. It's a disaster for the hedge funds who
have been short-selling Ocado's shares, betting that it would fail to achieve
international expansion. As Neil Wilson of Markets.com explains, Ocado now seems
to have real momentum. Bagging a giant US retailer is a major coup for [Ocado
CEO] Tim Steiner and as previously noted, we should see many more deals. Shares
are priced for these deals to be coming thick and fast. Peter Kiernan of the
Economist Intelligence Unit say's Total's (likely) withdrawal from Iran shows
that Donald Trump's sanctions could have a serious impact on the Iranian
economy. Kiernan explains: The announcement by Total that that it will leave
South Pars 11, unless it is granted a waiver from US secondary sanctions,
reflects the likelihood that European energy companies with exposure to the
American market or financial system will be unwilling to risk US penalties by
deciding to participate in Iran's oil and gas sector. Iran will seek alternative
sources of investment, such as Chinese companies, to get the funds it requires
to develop its energy sector instead, but Iran's likely inability to attract
major European companies going forward will be a setback. The Total announcement
also gives notice to the difficulties that European policymakers could face in
the longer term as they try to keep Iran itself in the nuclear agreement. If
investment in Iran does dry up and Iran's oil exports are significantly cut,
both due to US pressures, it will make Europe's role in keeping the nuclear deal
alive more problematic. China is poised to step in if France's Total does indeed
pull out of the Iranian South Pars 11 gas field project (as seems likely).
Iran's oil minister, Bijan Namdar Zanganeh, has revealed that state-owned
Chinese oil firm CNPC is waiting in the wings, if needed. Zanganeh said: "Total
has said that if it doesn't get an exemption from the United States to continue
its work, it will begin to pull out of the deal. If that happens, the Chinese
firm CNPC will replace Total." Given its strong rally over the last year,
analysts are wondering how much higher oil could go. Morgan Stanley have
predicted that Brent will trade at $90 per barrel in 2020, thanks to increased
demand for diesel (due to new anti-pollution rules on shipping) and jet fuel.
Bank of America Merrill Lynch is even more bullish. It estimates that oil could
hit $100 per barrel next year, due to supply constrains from Iran (due to
sanctions) and Venezuela (where political instability could hit supplies).
Francisco Blanch, head of commodities research at BAML, says: "Looking into the
next 18 months, we expect global oil supply and demand balances to tighten." US
crude oil has also hit its highest level since 2014. It's up nearly 1% at over
$72 per barrel, mirroring today's rise in Brent crude (which is sourced from the
North Sea) Rising oil prices are a boost to the world's crude producers, but a
blow to those countries who are net importers of energy. For them, $80 per
barrel oil means higher inflation, and could be bad for growth if consumers have
less disposable income to spend once they've covered their fuel and energy
costs. Here's some instant reaction: Newsflash: Brent crude has hit $80 per
barrel for the first time since November 2014. The news that Total is planning
to withdaw from its large Iran gas field deal has pushed prices steadily higher
this morning. The price of a barrel of Brent crude has now gained more than 16%
since early April, as traders anticipate supply shortages if geopolitical
tensions in the Middle East continue to rise. Norbert Ruecker, head of macro and
commodity research at Julius Baer, says: "Supply concerns are top of mind after
the U.S. left the Iran nuclear deal. The geopolitical noise and escalation fears
are here to stay." Now this is interesting.... Iranian state TV is reporting
that a British consortium called Pergas has signed a deal to develop an oil
field in the south of Iran. Associated Press have the details: The agreement is
the first between Iran and a key Western ally of the United States since
Washington last week announced it will pull out of the landmark 2015 nuclear
deal between Iran and Western powers. Managing Director of Pergas International
Consortium Colin Rowley, and Bijan Alipour, managing director of National
Iranian South Oil Co., signed a preliminary deed on the partnership in the
presence of British Ambassador Rob Macaire in Tehran on Wednesday night. The
project, if the agreement turns into a contract, will require more than $1
billion to produce 200,000 barrels of crude oil per day during the next decade
in the 55-year old Karanj oil filed. But what about the prospect of US
sanctions? Well....Pergas is clear that its focus is on the "Eastern
Hemisphere", with projects in the Middle East, South East Asia and Africa. It
must feel safe from Washington's threat to ban foreign firms from accessing the
entire US banking and financial system if they deal with Iran. Total isn't
alone! Moller-Maersk, the world's largest shipping firm is also planning to pull
out of Iran. Moller-Maersk's CEO, Soren Skou, says it will withdraw because of
the threat of sanctions from America on any company which maintains links with
the Iranians. Skou told Reuters: "With the sanctions the Americans are to
impose, you can't do business in Iran if you also have business in the U.S., and
we have that on a large scale. "I don't know the exact timing details, but I am
certain that we're also going to shut down (in Iran)". Skou was speaking after
Moller-Maersk reported an "unsatisfactory" underlying loss of $239m in the last
three months. It blamed the rising "geopolitical risks" and the threat of a
trade war for driving down shipping rates. French president Emmanuel Macron has
weighed in, calling on the European Union to protect companies who want to keep
trading with Iran. Speaking at an EU summit in Sofia, Bulgaria, Macron said that
France backed a proposal for the EC to protect and compensate European companies
hit by US sanctions. Called 'blocking sanctions', they could provide a way for
Europe to keep the Iran deal alive. Asked about Total's threat to quit Iran,
Macron told reporters that multinational companies must make their own decisions
- but smaller companies needed protection to keep operating in Iran if they want
to. "International companies with interests in many countries make their own
choices according to their own interests. They should continue to have this
freedom." But what is important is that companies and especially medium-sized
companies which are perhaps less exposed to other markets, American or others,
can make this choice freely." Brent is creeping higher, and has touched $76.62
per barrel. Oil's push to a new three and a half-year high threatens to keep
inflation up, hitting households and eroding real wages: Oil is also getting a
lift from new data showing that US inventories fell by 1.4 million barrels last
week. That suggests stronger demand for crude stocks - which should push prices
higher. Total's threat to quit its Iran gas project is significant because it
shows that the whole Iranian nuclear deal could unravel. As well as withdrawing
from the agreement this month, president Trump declared that companies worldwide
must stop doing business with Iran or risk US fines or other punishment. If
Total pulls out, other companies will be more reluctant to invest in Iran - a
blow to President Hassan Rouhani's hopes of attracting new investment. Rouhani
travelled to Davos in 2014 in an attempt to encourage international firms to
invest in Iran; he had hope to attract $200bn of energy infrastructure
investments by 2021. Sanam Vakil, associate fellow at Chatham House, said
Total's announcement was "a bad sign, adding: The EU can't compel or really
protect the private sector. Bjarne Schieldrop, an oil analyst at SEB, told the
Financial Times that it undermines Europe's efforts to keep the Iran nuclear
deal alive: "Total's action... backs up the idea that no one sees an easy
solution here and that there is little expectation of US leniency," "Whatever
the politicians in Europe are saying, the private companies are just pulling out
and folding the cards." Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the
world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The oil price
is heading towards $80 per barrel for the first time since 2014, as Donald
Trump's decision to impose sanctions on Iran continues to reverberate through
the financial markets. French energy giant Total announced it would withdraw
from a Iranian gas deal before the end of the year, unless it gets a waiver. In
a statement last night, Total explained: Total will not continue the SP11 (South
Pars 11) project and will have to unwind all related operations before 4
November 2018, unless Total is granted a specific project waiver by US
authorities with the support of the French and European authorities. This looks
like a blow to Europe's hopes of keeping its current economic ties with Iran
intact, following America's withdrawal from the Iranian nuclear deal earlier
this month. The SP11 agreement was signed last July, making Total the first
major Western energy company to invest in the Islamic Republic since sanctions
were lifted in 2016. Now, though, Total is worried that it would be sanctioned
by the US authorities if it kept dealing with Iran. The potential penalties from
Washington simply look unpalatable. The news sent Brent crude jumping to $79.47,
a three and a half-year high. This puts $80 in traders' sights - and leaving
motorists facing higher prices at the pumps. Mihir Kapadia, CEO and founder of
Sun Global Investments, agrees that geopolitical tensions are driving energy
prices higher, with unrest is building in Venezuela ahead of this weekend's
presidential elections. Kapadia explains: Venezuela's situation grows
increasingly worrying and the expected drop in production from Iran means that
prices are expected to reach four-year highs once again. There are still
concerns as to how increasing oil prices will affect the U.S. and global
economy, and with tensions in the Middle East also growing, the next few months
is likely to see the market become highly volatile." Also coming up today:
Britain's bookmakers are reeling from the news that the maximum stake on their
fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs) must be cut from £100 to £2, in an attempt
to tackle the social damage caused by gambling. It's also a busy morning in the
City, with estate agent Foxtons warning that the London property market remains
"very challenging", Ocado landing a partnership with US retailer Kroger, and
Mothercare announcing the return of once-sacked CEO Mark Newton-Jones. Holiday
operator Thomas Cook and Royal Mail are also updating the market. The agenda:
1.30pm BST: US weekly jobless figures 5pm BST: Bank of England chief economist
Andy Haldane speaks in London 17252 false      A North Sea Oil platform rig
Tusk         "Bots" are seen operating on Ocado's "smart platform" at the its
customer fulfilment centre in Andover.        Brent crude is moving closer to
$80 for the first time since 2014        A P Moller-Maersk Group's Eugen Maersk
container ship.        German Chancellor Angela Merkel, French President
Emmanuel Macron and British Prime Minister Theresa May at the EU-Western Balkans
summit in Sofia, Bulgaria today.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              94 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 17, 2018 Thursday 5:00 AM GMT

Germany moves slowly on returning museum exhibits to ex-colonies;
Angela Merkel should heed Emmanuel Macron's call for restitution to Africa, say
critics

BYLINE: Philip Oltermann in Berlin

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Version:3

LENGTH: 941 words


Berlin's longest-standing African is 13 metres tall and carries in his bones the
wisdom of 150m years. The skeleton of the Brachiosaurus brancai, the star of the
city's natural history museum, was dug up by a German paleontologist between
1909 and 1913 in Tanzania, then part of the German empire's largest colony.

When the French president, Emmanuel Macron, announced last November that he
wanted to use his presidency to lay the ground for "the temporary or permanent
restitution of African patrimony to Africa", many thought the time had come for
the dinosaur to head back home.

But, six months later, the Berlin Brachiosaurus is not moving an inch: a sign,
activists and historians say, that Merkel's government is failing to respond to
Macron's call with a similarly bold message, and that German museums are
dragging their feet.

New guidelines on the restitution of objects from "colonial contexts" were
unveiled by the German culture minister, Monika Grütters, on Monday. She
accepted the need to re-examine the provenance of objects amassed not just in
the three decades in which Germany emulated other European states
empire-building on the African continent, but during a colonial period defined
as stretching back to the 15th-century conquistadores and into the present day.

Grütters said she wanted to continue the politics of remembrance that had had "a
great share in shaping Germany's reputation in the world". She said: "For too
long, the colonial period has been a blind spot in our remembrance culture, and
reassessing it is part of our responsibility in Germany towards former
colonies."

But while Germany's first official definition of colonial contexts is
surprisingly broad, critics say the bar for restitution claims has been set
discouragingly high.

The non-binding guidelines state that returning artefacts with a problematic
history to their country of origin must not be a "compulsory solution", and
should be considered mainly for objects that violated the "legal and ethical
standards" in the former colonies at the time.

Eckart Köhne, the director of the German museums association, said of Macron's
appeal: "If that is an appeal that means museum collections should be packed
wholesale into a lorry and shipped abroad, then we do not consider that the
right way."

Activists have criticised the new document as a clear rejection of the French
president's initiative. "The guidelines are an attempt to preserve vested
colonial interests that is doomed to failure", said Tahir Della of the
initiative for black people in Germany (ISD).

"Every day, members of the communities of African origin in Africa and here in
the diaspora have a better picture of which of their looted treasures lie in the
cellars of European museums, and they won't rest until they have got back what
belongs to them."

"German museums need a strong signal from the government," said Jürgen Zimmerer,
a historian of colonialism at Hamburg university who also contributed to the new
guidelines. "There needs to be a clear indication of a political will to engage
with the colonial period. Without it, the impression prevails that for Germany
this is only about money."

Macron's comments have focused public debate in Germany about the country's
"colonial blindspots" as Berlin prepares for the opening of the controversial
Humboldt Forum in 2019, which will unite the city's ethnographic and Asian art
collections in a reconstruction of its Prussian-era palace.

On Wednesday, Berlin's Prussian cultural heritage foundation formally returned
nine objects from the city's collection to the Chugach Alaska Corporation, which
represents indigenous peoples from south-western Alaska.

A research project had revealed that the artefacts - including two broken masks,
a child's cradle, and a wooden idol - had been removed unlawfully from Alaskan
native graves by the Norwegian ethnologist Johan Adrian Jacobsen in the 1880s.

More prominent objects in Berlin's collection, such as the Brachiosaurus
brancai, however, are unlikely to be moved by the new restitution drive.

The excavation of the colossus from Tanzania's fossil-rich Tendaguru formation
started in 1909, two years after colonial powers in German east Africa had
squashed an armed uprising known as the Maji Maji rebellion, resulting in the
deaths of 250,000-300,000 people from the local population.

But a three-year research project into the conditions of the dig, funded by the
German federal ministry for education and research to be published later this
year, found that the Brachiosaurus's bones were dug up under conditions of
"fair" pay, without slave labour, said the natural history museum's director,
Johannes Vogel.

Vogel told the Guardian that the dinosaur, the tallest mounted skeleton in the
world, was not a cash cow for his museum but a live research object that was
expensive to maintain.

Earlier this month, Tanzania's foreign minister, Augustine Mahiga, waived
demands for the restitution of plundered cultural artefacts from the colonial
period.

Speaking at a meeting with the German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, in Dar es
Salaam, Mahiga said the dinosaur "does not belong to Germany or Tanzania" but
should be considered a piece of world heritage, and praised the museum's
treatment of the remains. "The German taxpayer pays a lot of money to preserve
it," he said. The Tanzanian government is a recipient of German development aid.

Instead of restituting the skeleton to Tanzania, Vogel said, the museum was
proposing a programme whereby Berlin would help train up Tanzanian
palaeontologists and technical workers to explore the large uncharted sections
of the Tendaguru formation.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              95 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Powers for Bavaria police 'hark back to the Gestapo'

BYLINE: David Charter Berlin

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 216 words


Strict new policing laws in Bavaria have been called the most intrusive since
the Nazi era as the state's leadership tries to win back voters from the far
right.

Police capabilities are a state responsibility in Germany and changes in Bavaria
mean officers will be able to tap phones, open post and make "preventative
arrests" on the ground of "impending danger". The term, which replaced "concrete
danger", came from a German constitutional court ruling that gave police new
powers to combat terrorism, but Bavaria has applied it to the broader category
of "serious offences".

Opposition has been led by football fans across Germany, including fans of
Bayern Munich, Bavaria's talismanic team, who compare the powers to those of the
Gestapo, the Nazi secret police.

The Christian Social Union, sister party of Angela Merkel's Christian Democratic
Union, is trying to neutralise Alternative for Germany, which took 12.4 per cent
of the Bavarian vote in September's general election. Last week, 30,000 people
protested in Munich against the changes.

A group of Bayern Munich fans wrote on their website: "This is the abolition of
separation between police and intelligence services, an important principle in
the establishment of the Federal Republic of Germany, based on its experience
with the Gestapo."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              96 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Powers for Bavaria police 'hark back to the Gestapo'

BYLINE: David Charter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 216 words


Strict new policing laws in Bavaria have been called the most intrusive since
the Nazi era as the state's leadership tries to win back voters from the far
right.

Police capabilities are a state responsibility in Germany and changes in Bavaria
mean officers will be able to tap phones, open post and make "preventative
arrests" on the ground of "impending danger". The term, which replaced "concrete
danger", came from a German constitutional court ruling that gave police new
powers to combat terrorism, but Bavaria has applied it to the broader category
of "serious offences".

Opposition has been led by football fans across Germany, including fans of
Bayern Munich, Bavaria's talismanic team, who compare the powers to those of the
Gestapo, the Nazi secret police.

The Christian Social Union, sister party of Angela Merkel's Christian Democratic
Union, is trying to neutralise Alternative for Germany, which took 12.4 per cent
of the Bavarian vote in September's general election. Last week, 30,000 people
protested in Munich against the changes.

A group of Bayern Munich fans wrote on their website: "This is the abolition of
separation between police and intelligence services, an important principle in
the establishment of the Federal Republic of Germany, based on its experience
with the Gestapo."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              97 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Powers for Bavaria police 'hark back to the Gestapo'

BYLINE: David Charter

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 216 words


Strict new policing laws in Bavaria have been called the most intrusive since
the Nazi era as the state's leadership tries to win back voters from the far
right.

Police capabilities are a state responsibility in Germany and changes in Bavaria
mean officers will be able to tap phones, open post and make "preventative
arrests" on the ground of "impending danger". The term, which replaced "concrete
danger", came from a German constitutional court ruling that gave police new
powers to combat terrorism, but Bavaria has applied it to the broader category
of "serious offences".

Opposition has been led by football fans across Germany, including fans of
Bayern Munich, Bavaria's talismanic team, who compare the powers to those of the
Gestapo, the Nazi secret police.

The Christian Social Union, sister party of Angela Merkel's Christian Democratic
Union, is trying to neutralise Alternative for Germany, which took 12.4 per cent
of the Bavarian vote in September's general election. Last week, 30,000 people
protested in Munich against the changes.

A group of Bayern Munich fans wrote on their website: "This is the abolition of
separation between police and intelligence services, an important principle in
the establishment of the Federal Republic of Germany, based on its experience
with the Gestapo."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              98 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Southern Insurgency;
A populist Italian government will be a thorn in Brussels' side

SECTION: EDITORIAL; OPINION; LEADING ARTICLES; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 562 words


The European Union can expect a rocky ride if Italy's two large populist
groupings succeed in forming a government over the coming days. The new
coalition, if it irons out its differences, is likely to drive a coach and
horses through the eurozone's stability and growth pact, abandoning restraints
on public expenditure. It will mount a serious challenge to the continent's
immigration policies and it will openly appeal for the support of insurgent
parties across the continent.

If Brussels thought that dealing with Greece's Syriza government was a
nightmare, it should now fasten its seatbelts. Italy is the third largest
eurozone economy, it has a debt-to-gross domestic product ratio of 132 per cent
and it is about to get a government that is seething with rage about Europe's
indifference to its plight and the rigidity of its rules.

The general election last March showed that Italian voters were fed up with the
establishment in Rome and with the sacrifices seemingly demanded by Brussels.
The momentum passed to the Five Star Movement, a left-leaning eurosceptic
alliance that, with promises of a minimum wage, won the backing of many
southerners. The other big beneficiary was League, which is an unabashed
far-right movement. More experienced than Five Star, more focused on the kind of
change it wants to bring to Italy, it is likely to be the dominant force in a
coalition. Its leader, Matteo Salvini, says: "If the rules, parameters and
constraints imposed by Europe do not change, Italy suffocates." Markets have
shown signs of jitters while Brussels bureaucrats have been careful with their
words. Perhaps the EU calculates that the budding government will collapse,
handicapped by the political inexperience of Five Star. The Italian president,
Sergio Mattarella, has the power to declare the coalition unworkable, appoint a
government of technocrats and call for new elections. Perhaps the EU is counting
on the revival of a centre-right government in any such election.

Yet these are likely to be pipe dreams. A government of technocrats would end up
boosting the populists and reinforce an argument that the Roman political class
is losing its democratic legitimacy. If a League-Five Star government proved to
be popular, it would become a model for the likes of Marine Le Pen's National
Front and Geert Wilders' Freedom Party in the Netherlands. European elites may
reckon that they have contained this insurgent challenge but Italian populists,
dealing directly with discontent about mass immigration from northern Africa,
know how to convert fear of foreigners into votes.

Angela Merkel's misjudged opening of the German borders in 2015 created a crisis
for Italy. Italians believe they were abandoned by the EU. The raising of the
pension age by a Euro-friendly Italian government in 2011, meanwhile, was
intended to restore trust in the country's abilities to deal with its long-term
public financing. Today voters see it as a cruel imposition.

Mr Salvini promises big infrastructural investments but the embryo coalition has
failed to come up with a coherent way of financing the projects. Nor does it
have a plan for tackling Italy's dismal productivity rates. All the signs are
that this government will flounder and depend for its support on mobilising
anti-Brussels, anti-Trump and pro-Putin sentiment. That is a recipe for European
instability.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              99 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Southern Insurgency;
A populist Italian government will be a thorn in Brussels' side

SECTION: EDITORIAL; OPINION; LEADING ARTICLES; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 562 words


The European Union can expect a rocky ride if Italy's two large populist
groupings succeed in forming a government over the coming days. The new
coalition, if it irons out its differences, is likely to drive a coach and
horses through the eurozone's stability and growth pact, abandoning restraints
on public expenditure. It will mount a serious challenge to the continent's
immigration policies and it will openly appeal for the support of insurgent
parties across the continent.

If Brussels thought that dealing with Greece's Syriza government was a
nightmare, it should now fasten its seatbelts. Italy is the third largest
eurozone economy, it has a debt-to-gross domestic product ratio of 132 per cent
and it is about to get a government that is seething with rage about Europe's
indifference to its plight and the rigidity of its rules.

The general election last March showed that Italian voters were fed up with the
establishment in Rome and with the sacrifices seemingly demanded by Brussels.
The momentum passed to the Five Star Movement, a left-leaning eurosceptic
alliance that, with promises of a minimum wage, won the backing of many
southerners. The other big beneficiary was League, which is an unabashed
far-right movement. More experienced than Five Star, more focused on the kind of
change it wants to bring to Italy, it is likely to be the dominant force in a
coalition. Its leader, Matteo Salvini, says: "If the rules, parameters and
constraints imposed by Europe do not change, Italy suffocates." Markets have
shown signs of jitters while Brussels bureaucrats have been careful with their
words. Perhaps the EU calculates that the budding government will collapse,
handicapped by the political inexperience of Five Star. The Italian president,
Sergio Mattarella, has the power to declare the coalition unworkable, appoint a
government of technocrats and call for new elections. Perhaps the EU is counting
on the revival of a centre-right government in any such election.

Yet these are likely to be pipe dreams. A government of technocrats would end up
boosting the populists and reinforce an argument that the Roman political class
is losing its democratic legitimacy. If a League-Five Star government proved to
be popular, it would become a model for the likes of Marine Le Pen's National
Front and Geert Wilders' Freedom Party in the Netherlands. European elites may
reckon that they have contained this insurgent challenge but Italian populists,
dealing directly with discontent about mass immigration from northern Africa,
know how to convert fear of foreigners into votes.

Angela Merkel's misjudged opening of the German borders in 2015 created a crisis
for Italy. Italians believe they were abandoned by the EU. The raising of the
pension age by a Euro-friendly Italian government in 2011, meanwhile, was
intended to restore trust in the country's abilities to deal with its long-term
public financing. Today voters see it as a cruel imposition.

Mr Salvini promises big infrastructural investments but the embryo coalition has
failed to come up with a coherent way of financing the projects. Nor does it
have a plan for tackling Italy's dismal productivity rates. All the signs are
that this government will flounder and depend for its support on mobilising
anti-Brussels, anti-Trump and pro-Putin sentiment. That is a recipe for European
instability.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              100 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 17, 2018 Thursday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Southern Insurgency;
A populist Italian government will be a thorn in Brussels' side

SECTION: EDITORIAL; OPINION; LEADING ARTICLES; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 562 words


The European Union can expect a rocky ride if Italy's two large populist
groupings succeed in forming a government over the coming days. The new
coalition, if it irons out its differences, is likely to drive a coach and
horses through the eurozone's stability and growth pact, abandoning restraints
on public expenditure. It will mount a serious challenge to the continent's
immigration policies and it will openly appeal for the support of insurgent
parties across the continent.

If Brussels thought that dealing with Greece's Syriza government was a
nightmare, it should now fasten its seatbelts. Italy is the third largest
eurozone economy, it has a debt-to-gross domestic product ratio of 132 per cent
and it is about to get a government that is seething with rage about Europe's
indifference to its plight and the rigidity of its rules.

The general election last March showed that Italian voters were fed up with the
establishment in Rome and with the sacrifices seemingly demanded by Brussels.
The momentum passed to the Five Star Movement, a left-leaning eurosceptic
alliance that, with promises of a minimum wage, won the backing of many
southerners. The other big beneficiary was League, which is an unabashed
far-right movement. More experienced than Five Star, more focused on the kind of
change it wants to bring to Italy, it is likely to be the dominant force in a
coalition. Its leader, Matteo Salvini, says: "If the rules, parameters and
constraints imposed by Europe do not change, Italy suffocates." Markets have
shown signs of jitters while Brussels bureaucrats have been careful with their
words. Perhaps the EU calculates that the budding government will collapse,
handicapped by the political inexperience of Five Star. The Italian president,
Sergio Mattarella, has the power to declare the coalition unworkable, appoint a
government of technocrats and call for new elections. Perhaps the EU is counting
on the revival of a centre-right government in any such election.

Yet these are likely to be pipe dreams. A government of technocrats would end up
boosting the populists and reinforce an argument that the Roman political class
is losing its democratic legitimacy. If a League-Five Star government proved to
be popular, it would become a model for the likes of Marine Le Pen's National
Front and Geert Wilders' Freedom Party in the Netherlands. European elites may
reckon that they have contained this insurgent challenge but Italian populists,
dealing directly with discontent about mass immigration from northern Africa,
know how to convert fear of foreigners into votes.

Angela Merkel's misjudged opening of the German borders in 2015 created a crisis
for Italy. Italians believe they were abandoned by the EU. The raising of the
pension age by a Euro-friendly Italian government in 2011, meanwhile, was
intended to restore trust in the country's abilities to deal with its long-term
public financing. Today voters see it as a cruel imposition.

Mr Salvini promises big infrastructural investments but the embryo coalition has
failed to come up with a coherent way of financing the projects. Nor does it
have a plan for tackling Italy's dismal productivity rates. All the signs are
that this government will flounder and depend for its support on mobilising
anti-Brussels, anti-Trump and pro-Putin sentiment. That is a recipe for European
instability.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              101 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

High eurozone unemployment threatening recovery, says IMF

BYLINE: Anna Isaac

SECTION: BUSINESS;NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 611 words


UNEMPLOYMENT is still too high in many EU countries, risking the sustainability
of future growth, as figures increasingly suggest an economic slowdown.

Eurozone GDP rose by 0.4pc in the three months to March, a 0.3 percentage point
drop in growth compared to the previous quarter.

The economic recovery following the 2008 recession and the 2013 European debt
crisis was in jeopardy even "in the absence of external shocks", according to a
report on the economic outlook for the European region by the International
Monetary Fund (IMF).

With unemployment still high in some major economies, investment levels would
need to rise in order to ensure "the recovery has the legs to last". Investment
levels have been much weaker than those after the 1991 global financial crisis,
however, the IMF said.

Policymakers should rebuild their "room for fiscal manoeuvre" and push forward
with reforms in order to boost growth potential, the IMF said. Some economic
improvement might be seen in the short term but medium-term prospects for the
region were "less bright", it added.

Tackling high debt levels would be crucial for many European countries as they
tried to cope with the economic pressures of ageing populations from areas such
as pensions and healthcare.

This comes as a coalition of Italy's populist parties, the Five Star Movement
and The League, are seeking to form a coalition government, with plans for a
(EURO)100bn (£88bn) spending spree. It would include a reversal of the
incomplete 2011 efforts to reform Italy's state pensions. Economists have warned
that alone could cost as much as (EURO)15bn.

Italy's national debt was over 130pc of GDP at the end of 2016, second only to
Greece with 179pc.

The economic recovery provided "an opportunity to move faster to deepen economic
and monetary union" within the eurozone by means of greater risk sharing between
countries. This repeated calls made in March by IMF chief Christine Lagarde for
a eurozone rainy day fund. There is also a "strong case" for a central fiscal
capacity, the IMF added.

High ratios of debt to GDP in many eurozone states and Italy in particular, as
well as high levels of non-performing loans, are some of the main barriers
preventing close fiscal union within the euro currency bloc. This greater level
of unification, as favoured by French president Emmanuel Macron, has long been
questioned by Germany, which fears sharing the risks of less economically strong
eurozone counterparts.

However, despite continued tensions following the Greek economic crisis,
Germany's political leadership - including chancellor Angela Merkel - have
become increasingly positive about greater integration, giving her backing to a
bailout fund in April. This is despite finance chiefs of several member states
publicly opposing greater integration, fearing greater Franco-German economic
dominance.

The IMF also called for a hasty building of the Capital Markets Union, which
would protect cross-border investment rights and harmonise insolvency regimes.
This was a matter that Brexit had made more urgent, it noted.

Other headaches pointed to by the report included the significant dependency on
EU funds of some states. Half of public investment in Romania and Hungary in
2017 was generated by EU funds, the IMF said.

This has become an increasingly controversial topic as a new EU budget was
revealed in recent weeks, with sources suggesting that a failure to live up to
democratic standards - following the heavily criticised elections in Hungary -
could result in a slashing of EU subsidies for some states.

0.4pc Growth in eurozone GDP in the three months to March, down from 0.7pc
growth in the previous quarter

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2018 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              102 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

The PM's fudge will have the UK singing;
Britons want both to Leave and to Remain. So, Mrs May's compromise will keep
everyone happy

BYLINE: MAURICE SAATCHI

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 693 words


Aclassic case, I'm afraid.Schizophrenia. Split personality.Fantasy and reality
all mixed up. Two heads on the same body. The usual symptoms: anger,
frustration, self-harm. Hallucinations. Paranoia. It's like a timebomb. It might
go off at any moment.

And only one doctor who recognised the signs: the Prime Minister. As soon as she
saw our Referendum Test Results, she saw right away that we the people want two
things at the same time. We conform with Freud's Law of Ambivalence, which
states that human beings can love and hate the same object at the same time.

The simplest of examples: we want a strong border to stop the immigrants
flooding in. But we don't want lorries backed up the M20 on the way to the
Calais ferry for our holiday.

She understood exactly what we want. Two things at once. To Leave. And to
Remain. This is called compromise, sometimes insultingly known as fudge. She saw
that is what we need. Fudge for breakfast. Fudge for lunch. And fudge for
dinner.

You have heard it said this is a "sickening insult to democracy". A "slap in the
face". "Riding roughshod" over the people. But I say the PM is following most
accurately the "clearly expressed mandate" of the "Sovereign will of the people"
for a reasonable compromise - the golden mean, sweet moderation in all things.

Welcome to Maurice's Fudge Shop, where we serve fudge with chocolate sauce and a
scoop of vanilla ice cream on the side, with clotted cream for MPs and whipped
for Peers. Maurice's Fudge began shortly after the referendum when we started to
make homemade fudge in our farmhouse kitchen. Philip and Theresa are now regular
customers at our Maidenhead branch. And we all look forward to the day when she
comes back from Paris with the exciting news of the deal she has done over
leaving the EU.

It will be a photo opportunity shared across all televisions, all platforms, all
devices all over the world. It will immediately go viral, downloaded 1.2 billion
times in 43 seconds. There are three people in the picture: German Chancellor
Angela Merkel, French President Emmanuel Macron and, standing between them and
slightly in front, Mrs May. The backdrop is the Eiffel Tower in Paris.

Mrs Merkel speaks first: "Today, every citizen of Europe gives thanks to Prime
Minister May for this historic agreement, which guarantees the peace, prosperity
and security of all the people of Europe." A spectacular firework display then
illuminates the Eiffel Tower.

The PM comes home in a special plane of the Queen's Flight. She is driven to
Buckingham Palace to inform Her Majesty of her progress. Returning to Downing
Street through crowd-lined streets under a pale May sun, the Prime Minister
speaks - a lone figure, standing at the now familiar lectern outside the door of
No 10. She announces: "We are no longer a member of the EU. We are now a partner
of the EU."

The crowd roars its approval as she reports: "All our red lines have been
achieved. We are no longer a member of the single market. We are now a member of
the Single Platform. We are no longer a member of the customs union. We are now
a member of the customs group. We are no longer under the jurisdiction of the
European Court of Justice. We will not 'take account of ' or 'have regard to'
the decisions of the ECJ. We will have only 'due regard' to its rulings, and we
will no longer submit to 'free movement' of persons." Turning from the world's
cameras to speak directly to the British people, she says: "I have carried out
the task you gave me. I have delivered the will of the British people. I now
await your further instructions."

As she turns to enter No 10, some reporters shout out: "Prime Minister, Prime
Minister! Nothing has changed." But their voices are drowned out by the
spontaneous singing of the citizens outside the gates: "For she's a jolly good
fellow and so say all of us!"

She is voted one of the greatest prime ministers of all time, and a grateful
nation erects a bronze statue of her in Parliament Square. On the plinth are
inscribed her historic words: "If they won't budge! Fudge!"

Lord Saatchi is the former chairman of the Conservative Party

READ MORE at www.telegraph.co.uk/ opinion

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2018 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              103 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Ozil and Gundogan slammed;
In brief

SECTION: SPORT; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 45 words


Mesut Ozil and Ilkay Gundogan have been criticised by Germany's manager Joachim
Low and Chancellor Angela Merkel's spokesman for posing for a photo with
Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Low announced he has extended his
contract with the national team until 2022.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2018 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              104 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                          The Daily Telegraph (London)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 2;
                                National Edition

Ozil and Gundogan [...];
In brief

SECTION: SPORT; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 36 words


Ozil and Gundogan slammed Mesut Ozil and Ilkay Gundogan have been criticised by
Germany's manager Joachim Low and Chancellor Angela Merkel's spokesman for
posing for a photo with Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DTL


                  Copyright 2018 Telegraph Media Group Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              105 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

Battle for EDP set to test attitudes towards China;
Utilities. Electricity ; Pursuit of Portuguese power company likely to be
lengthy and politically contentious

BYLINE: ANDREW WARD;ARASH MASSOUDI ;PETER WISE

SECTION: COMPANIES AND MARKETS;BUSINESS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 678 words


The rejection by Energias de Portugal of a (EURO)9bn takeover by China Three
Gorges yesterday completed the opening shots in what is likely to be a long
battle for control of Portugal's largest utility.

At stake is much more than just the future of EDP. The proposed deal will test
attitudes to Chinese investment in critical infrastructure on both sides of the
Atlantic at a time of strained trade relations between Beijing and the US.

To complete the acquisition, CTG, the state-owned operator of China's Three
Gorges dam, would need regulatory approval from the 14 countries where EDP
operates, including the US. But it must first persuade the company's
shareholders to accept its bid.

CTG on Friday offered (EURO)3.26 per share for the 76.7 per cent of EDP that it
does not already own. There was little surprise when the EDP board yesterday
dismissed that. The 5.5 per cent premium over the prior day's closing share
price fell short of "what is customary for European utilities where the offerer
has acquired control", the board said.

That is unlikely to be the end of the matter. People familiar with CTG's
thinking said the company remained committed to the deal. Shares in EDP traded 5
per cent above the CTG bid at (EURO)3.44 yesterday afternoon, implying that
investors expected an increased offer from CTG or a rival bidder.

Gas Natural of Spain and Engie of France have both been linked with EDP in the
past year. Enel of Italy and Iberdrola of Spain were mentioned by analysts and
bankers as other potential suitors at a time when Europe's largest utilities
want renewable assets of the kind that make up more than half of EDP's
portfolio.

But while a European takeover of EDP would overcome political concerns in
Brussels and Washington about Chinese investment, it is far from clear that this
would be welcomed in Lisbon.

Chinese companies bought a raft of assets in Portugal after the financial
crisis, including a (EURO)2.7bn investment in EDP by CTG, which today owns 23.3
per cent of the utility. State Grid, the Chinese monopoly power grid operator,
also bought a 25 per cent stake in its Portuguese counterpart REN. These deals
helped raise desperately needed capital after Portugal's 2011 bail-out by the EU
and IMF. Lisbon has since become a vocal opponent of EU curbs on Chinese
investment. António Costa, prime minister, said on Friday that his
administration had no objections to CTG taking control of EDP and praised
Chinese groups for being "good investors in Portugal".

CTG has promised to keep EDP as a separate entity listed in Lisbon, and to use
it as a vehicle for international expansion in renewable power. That is seen by
many in Lisbon as a more attractive option than the country's largest listed
company being broken up or subsumed by a European rival.

Moreover, a European suitor wanting full control would need to persuade CTG to
sell its stake. The Chinese company has no intention of doing that, according to
people familiar with its thinking.

Bankers said other European utilities could end up buying parts of EDP - perhaps
its US assets, for example - to help CTG overcome regulatory concerns. But
people close to CTG said the company wanted to keep EDP as intact as possible
and was not interested in any compromises that left it short of overall control.
Advisers have already been hired to guide CTG through the regulatory maze ahead,
most notably in Washington.

The prospect of another strategic asset falling under Chinese control is likely
to reinforce calls from some European capitals, including Paris and Berlin, for
the EU to be given its own powers to review and block foreign takeovers.

The influx of Chinese investment into Portugal was an unintended consequence of
Portugal's EU bailout, which was conditional on state assets being opened to
foreign investment. A bid by Eon, the German utility, for the government stake
in EDP received personal backing from Angela Merkel, German chancellor, in 2011
but Lisbon sold to CTG instead. This set the stage for the latest drama, which
bankers said would take months to play out.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Holding the line: EDP's Alqueva dam in southern Portugal. Renewables
make up most of its portfolio-Mario Proenca/Bloomberg

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              106 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                 Asian Edition

'The first crisis will kill us';
FT BIG READ. SERBIA ; An ultra-nationalist firebrand in his youth, Aleksandar
Vucic now sees EU membership as a catalyst for economic reform and political
stability. But to qualify, the president must resolve the status of Kosovo. By
Lionel Barber and Ben Hall

BYLINE: Lionel Barber ;BenHall

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 2244 words


F rom the balcony of his presidential office in Belgrade's sombre New Palace,
Aleksandar Vucic surveys the neatly trimmed gardens below. On this spot, he
whispers, King Alexander and Queen Draga of Serbia were defenestrated in an army
coup in 1903. When the king clung to the balustrade his fingers were hacked off;
his wife's body mutilated.

"There is no Alexander who survived in power," says Mr Vucic, with a touch of
melodrama. His words are a not-so-subtle reminder of the constraints the
selfstyled moderniser faces as he edges along the path of economic reform,
political stabilisation and, one day, potential EU membership.

A previous pro-western Serbian leader, Zoran Djindjic, was himself assassinated
in 2003, a suspected victim of organised crime. Serbia's western destiny is also
far from assured: as a "swing state" in the Balkans it has traditionally hedged
its bets between the European powers, Russia and, in the 19th century, Ottoman
Turkey.

Moreover, Mr Vucic, a bear of a man at 6ft 6in (1.99m) tall, remains an
ambiguous figure. He started in politics an ultra-nationalist firebrand who
vowed shortly after the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 that "for every Serb killed,
we will kill 100 Muslims". He served as information minister under Slobodan
Milosevic, the Serbian leader accused of 'Another war would ruin this country
and destroy the future of the Serbian people forever' Aleksandar Vucic war
crimes, and espoused Serbian expansionism in the former Yugoslavia.

But in 2008, Mr Vucic and some colleagues broke with Vojislav Seselj, the
radical nationalist ideologue, and founded the pro-EU Serbian Progressive party.
"You start to ask yourself whether those [radical] things are the only things
worth fighting for," he says of his chequered past.

Today he backs EU membership as a catalyst for change, final proof that Serbia
has escaped the nightmare of the Milosevic years marked by fanatical
nationalism, the Nato bombing of Yugoslavia, hyperinflation and rampant
warlords. "Another war would ruin this country and destroy the future of the
Serbian people forever."

Birthplace of the nation To qualify for EU membership, however, Mr Vucic must
first resolve the disputed status of Kosovo, the ethnic Albanian-majority
southern province whose 2008 declaration of independence from Belgrade has been
recognised by most western powers. Most Serbs, though, still regard it as the
birthplace of the nation and the Serbian Orthodox church. They remain staunchly
opposed to secession. "I'm obsessed with Kosovo," Mr Vucic confesses. "Without
resolving that problem everything I have achieved so far won't be sustainable.
The first crisis will kill us."

Courted by China and the United Arab Emirates as well as Serbia's occasional
ally Russia, Mr Vucic, 48, is now seen by EU leaders, and especially Germany's
Angela Merkel, as the best bet to bring his country into Europe's mainstream.

Critics counter that the EU has struck a Faustian pact with Mr Vucic. The hope
is that the carrot of membership will induce reform, with the prospect of
joining the EU by 2025. But that means meeting stiff conditions on strengthening
democratic institutions and tackling corruption as well as resolving Kosovo.
This year may well prove a decisive test, starting with a summit of EU and
western Balkans leaders in Sofia tomorrow intended to inject fresh impetus into
the bloc's enlargement.

The cynics suspect Mr Vucic is playing along - and that the EU will accommodate
him in the interests of regional security. Having won 55 per cent of the vote in
last year's presidential election, he is the undisputed master of the political
arena. Nine television screens in his office suggest a man who keeps tabs on
everything - and everybody. Some fear he could end up as another Viktor Orban,
Hungary's liberal-turned-nationalist leader, who complied with the EU's rules to
gain membership only to attack it from within. The parallel, says Mr Vucic, is
"99 per cent crap".

Another analogy for some is Viktor Yanukovich, the former Ukrainian president
who played the EU off against Russia - until he was ousted by a popular
uprising. Mr Vucic was Vladimir Putin's guest of honour at the Victory Day
parade in Moscow last week. He starts his working day at 6.30am with a Russian
language lesson. But he rejects the idea that he could become a "fifth column
for Putin in Europe". He says he has always been clear with the Russian
president that "Serbia remains on its EU path".

Overall, Mr Vucic's approach owes something to the legacy of Marshal Tito, the
postwar ruler of Yugoslavia who founded the Non-Aligned Movement and performed a
balancing act between the western powers and the Kremlin.

City of culture Optimists looking for signs of Serbia's EU vocation point to
Novi Sad, the country's second city, located on the northern plains. Here the
Austro-Hungarian empire left a deeper imprint than the Ottomans. In 2022 Novi
Sad will be the European capital of culture, a chance to showcase its thriving
arts scene and creative industries.

Sitting on the terrace of the city's Petrovaradin fortress, looking over the
Danube river, Dusan Kovacevic recalls the "explosion of energy" of the 1998
student protests in the city against Milosevic that marked the beginning of his
downfall. Mr Kovacevic now runs the EXIT music festival, one of the largest in
Europe with 150,000 attendees. Each July, it takes over the fortress in an event
akin to a Glastonbury-on-the-Danube.

EXIT is a showcase for a youthful, multicultural city that avoided the sectarian
violence that consumed most of the former Yugoslavia. In Belgrade, 50 miles to
the south, a very different riverside development is taking shape. Along the
Sava river, 100 hectares of derelict buildings have been cleared for upscale
apartments, luxury hotels and a shopping mall. The (EURO)3.5bn Belgrade
Waterfront project is backed with Emirati money (in Serbian government circles,
they refer to "his Highness", meaning not Serbia's Crown Prince Alexander but
Abu Dhabi's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed whom Mr Vucic has met 20 times by
his own account). But after bulldozers were sent to flatten buildings and goons
cracked a few heads, the development triggered the biggest antigovernment
protests in 20 years. Standing on the roof terrace of an unfinished block of
flats, Sinisa Mali, the young Belgrade mayor, rattles off statistics like a
Manhattan real estate salesman. Mr Mali, who once worked at Credit Suisse, is a
Vucic party man on the rise. "The idea of this project was to create a symbol of
change in Serbia. This is a game changer for us."

For Mr Vucic's critics, the Belgrade Waterfront is a glitzy façade that
distracts from a moribund economy weighed down by cronyism, corruption and shady
finance. Mr Vucic retorts that he has run fiscal surpluses for three years
following an IMF programme during which he cut pensions and froze wages.
Unemployment has halved to 12.9 per cent. The government hopes for 4 per cent
growth in gross domestic product in 2018, after lagging far behind much of
eastern Europe.

Foreign investors are looking for opportunities in sectors such as mining. With
encouragement from both Belgrade and Beijing, China's Hebei Steel took over
Serbia's largest steel plant in Smederevo east of the capital, saving thousands
of jobs.

Mr Vucic cultivates the image of a man who gets things done. Some business
figures agree and generally his opponents are regarded as weak, divided and
tainted by corruption. "It's easy for people to badmouth things and do nothing,"
says Branko Zecevic, a metals and mining entrepreneur.

One bright spot is a booming IT sector in Belgrade which is growing by 30 per
cent a year. But to many it is an exception that proves the rule: the growth
owes much to a cadre of highly educated Serbs who serve foreign clients under
foreign contracts, unhindered by the state or government cronies. It is
"employment by PayPal", says Goran Gocic, a writer.

The worry is the number of departing young Serbs - already running at 30,000 a
year, out of a population of 7m. The exodus, say the president's critics, is a
grim verdict on today's Serbia. Beyond fiscal consolidation and privatisation -
no mean achievements - Mr Vucic has shied away from cleaning up corruption.

The governing party is estimated to have some 600,000 members, almost one-tenth
of the population, who also make up the majority of all public sector
employment. The implication is that membership - and the payment of party dues -
is a prerequisite for employment, promotion or a contract.

"If you want to exist you have to enter the crony system," says Danica Popovic,
a professor of economics at Belgrade University. "Everything remains the same,
only the faces change."

Sasa Radulovic resigned in 2014 as economy minister after four months when his
reform plans were blocked by the previous coalition government. A former
businessman, he describes Serbia as a "partyocracy", where the "ruling party is
looking to get its hands on any institution, any source of money over a certain
threshold, any development that could weaken their grip on power". This
pervasive political control means that "economically Serbia is pretty much
dead", he says.

Mr Radulovic's undiluted pessimism reflects the frustration of being in an
opposition which Mr Vucic has relentlessly squeezed, curtailing broadcast
airtime and controlling political messaging through clever polling techniques.

However, the president does acknowledge that emigration is a serious problem,
while the economy remains vulnerable to a change in foreign investor sentiment,
especially if regional tensions flare up. "We just need to get it done and move
on," says Mr Mali, the Belgrade mayor, referring to a settlement on Kosovo.
"Otherwise everything will go sour."

Joining the club The prospect of EU membership, while distant, remains a vital
factor. For Mr Vucic, it offers a civilising influence not just for his country
but also the western Balkans region with an untapped market of 18m people, if
only political and economic barriers could be lifted.

For Brussels, EU membership offers the leverage to demand democratic standards
such as media freedom, plurality and the rule of law which, some argue, were
skated over in the last round of enlargement to the east, notably for Bulgaria
and Romania.

Tanja Miscevic, a former academic who is now Serbia's chief EU negotiator, says
the country will be held to higher standards than other eastern European states.
"We are the latecomers," she says. "On the one hand, it is a tougher and longer
process. On the other, this is something we have to do for ourselves."

The most pressing test is Kosovo. EU officials want Mr Vucic to sketch out
proposals in the coming months to kick-start talks with Kosovo's leaders. The
28-member bloc is not imposing its own solution because Spain and four others
refuse to recognise Kosovo's independence, largely for fear of setting
secessionist precedents for their own countries.

Serbia's foreign and defence ministers have openly backed the idea of partition,
retaking the northern part of Kosovo where much, but not all, of its Serbian 'We
are not going to give Kosovo away at any price.

We are in favour of joining the EU but not if Kosovo is the price' Patriarch
Irinej population lives. But this is a nonstarter for western powers who fear it
will open a Pandora's box of border disputes in the region.

Nor are they likely to backtrack on independence, as some Serbs imagine. The
most likely settlement would involve autonomy and power-sharing arrangements
akin to Northern Ireland for Serb-dominated areas, in return for recognition of
Kosovo's statehood, but even that would be a step too far for many Serbs and
would still face the hurdle of a referendum, where Mr Vucic could expect fierce
resistance from several quarters, including the Serbian Orthodox church.

"Hello," said Irinej, the 87-year-old Patriarch, as he welcomed the FT in
Belgrade. "You are British or American? Are you going to take Kosovo away from
us? We are not going to give Kosovo away at any price. We are European. We are
in favour of joining the EU but not if Kosovo is the price."

Mr Vucic could still prevail in a referendum, given his political dominance and
grip on the media, says one expert on Kosovo who declined to be named on
security grounds.

Last March, the expert says, an Orthodox priest was arrested together with a
male religious teacher dressed as a woman. In their car, the police happened to
discover 27kg of cannabis. It was too good to be true for Serbia's feverish
tabloids - and also served as a message to the Church: oppose us and we will
discredit you.

Mr Vucic says he is not running in a popularity contest, and has no desire to be
"likeable or loveable". He casts himself not as the last but certainly as the
best hope for his country. "Serbia has produced more history than it could
consume," he says, quoting Winston Churchill, "the most important thing to keep
is peace and tranquillity."

Brussels beckons The EU hopes that the lure of membership will spur reform and
efforts to tackle corruption Southern dispute A key issue will be resolving the
status of Kosovo, which declared independence in 2008 Cronyism burden Critics
say the overwhelming presence of the ruling party stifles economic development

4% Government target for GDP growth in 2018 12.9% The unemployment rate, which
has nearly halved since 2012 30,000 Serbs who leave the country each year

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Aleksandar Vucic, president, saysSerbia is on 'its EU path'. Below, an
ethnic Albanian woman passes Serbian police in 1998, and Serbian Patriarch
Irinej Bloomberg/Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              107 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

Battle for EDP set to test attitudes towards China;
Utilities. Electricity ; Pursuit of Portuguese power company likely to be
lengthy and politically contentious

BYLINE: ANDREW WARD ;ARASH MASSOUDI ;PETER WISE

SECTION: COMPANIES AND MARKETS;BUSINESS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 678 words


The rejection by Energias de Portugal of a (EURO)9bn takeover by China Three
Gorges yesterday completed the opening shots in what is likely to be a long
battle for control of Portugal's largest utility.

At stake is much more than just the future of EDP. The proposed deal will test
attitudes to Chinese investment in critical infrastructure on both sides of the
Atlantic at a time of strained trade relations between Beijing and the US.

To complete the acquisition, CTG, the state-owned operator of China's Three
Gorges dam, would need regulatory approval from the 14 countries where EDP
operates, including the US. But it must first persuade the company's
shareholders to accept its bid.

CTG on Friday offered (EURO)3.26 per share for the 76.7 per cent of EDP that it
does not already own. There was little surprise when the EDP board yesterday
dismissed that. The 5.5 per cent premium over the prior day's closing share
price fell short of "what is customary for European utilities where the offerer
has acquired control", the board said.

That is unlikely to be the end of the matter. People familiar with CTG's
thinking said the company remained committed to the deal. Shares in EDP traded 5
per cent above the CTG bid at (EURO)3.44 yesterday afternoon, implying that
investors expected an increased offer from CTG or a rival bidder.

Gas Natural of Spain and Engie of France have both been linked with EDP in the
past year. Enel of Italy and Iberdrola of Spain were mentioned by analysts and
bankers as other potential suitors at a time when Europe's largest utilities
want renewable assets of the kind that make up more than half of EDP's
portfolio.

But while a European takeover of EDP would overcome political concerns in
Brussels and Washington about Chinese investment, it is far from clear that this
would be welcomed in Lisbon.

Chinese companies bought a raft of assets in Portugal after the financial
crisis, including a (EURO)2.7bn investment in EDP by CTG, which today owns 23.3
per cent of the utility. State Grid, the Chinese monopoly power grid operator,
also bought a 25 per cent stake in its Portuguese counterpart REN. These deals
helped raise desperately needed capital after Portugal's 2011 bail-out by the EU
and IMF. Lisbon has since become a vocal opponent of EU curbs on Chinese
investment. António Costa, prime minister, said on Friday that his
administration had no objections to CTG taking control of EDP and praised
Chinese groups for being "good investors in Portugal".

CTG has promised to keep EDP as a separate entity listed in Lisbon, and to use
it as a vehicle for international expansion in renewable power. That is seen by
many in Lisbon as a more attractive option than the country's largest listed
company being broken up or subsumed by a European rival.

Moreover, a European suitor wanting full control would need to persuade CTG to
sell its stake. The Chinese company has no intention of doing that, according to
people familiar with its thinking.

Bankers said other European utilities could end up buying parts of EDP - perhaps
its US assets, for example - to help CTG overcome regulatory concerns. But
people close to CTG said the company wanted to keep EDP as intact as possible
and was not interested in any compromises that left it short of overall control.
Advisers have already been hired to guide CTG through the regulatory maze ahead,
most notably in Washington.

The prospect of another strategic asset falling under Chinese control is likely
to reinforce calls from some European capitals, including Paris and Berlin, for
the EU to be given its own powers to review and block foreign takeovers.

The influx of Chinese investment into Portugal was an unintended consequence of
Portugal's EU bailout, which was conditional on state assets being opened to
foreign investment. A bid by Eon, the German utility, for the government stake
in EDP received personal backing from Angela Merkel, German chancellor, in 2011
but Lisbon sold to CTG instead. This set the stage for the latest drama, which
bankers said would take months to play out.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Holding the line: EDP's Alqueva dam in southern Portugal. Renewables
make up most of its portfolio- Mario Proenca/Bloomberg

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              108 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                European Edition

'The first crisis will kill us';
FT BIG READ. SERBIA ; An ultra-nationalist firebrand in his youth, Aleksandar
Vucic now sees EU membership as a catalyst for economic reform and political
stability. But to qualify, the president must resolve the status of Kosovo. By
Lionel Barber and Ben Hall

BYLINE: Lionel Barber ; BenHall

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 2244 words


F rom the balcony of his presidential office in Belgrade's sombre New Palace,
Aleksandar Vucic surveys the neatly trimmed gardens below. On this spot, he
whispers, King Alexander and Queen Draga of Serbia were defenestrated in an army
coup in 1903. When the king clung to the balustrade his fingers were hacked off;
his wife's body mutilated.

"There is no Alexander who survived in power," says Mr Vucic, with a touch of
melodrama. His words are a not-so-subtle reminder of the constraints the
selfstyled moderniser faces as he edges along the path of economic reform,
political stabilisation and, one day, potential EU membership.

A previous pro-western Serbian leader, Zoran Djindjic, was himself assassinated
in 2003, a suspected victim of organised crime. Serbia's western destiny is also
far from assured: as a "swing state" in the Balkans it has traditionally hedged
its bets between the European powers, Russia and, in the 19th century, Ottoman
Turkey.

Moreover, Mr Vucic, a bear of a man at 6ft 6in (1.99m) tall, remains an
ambiguous figure. He started in politics an ultra-nationalist firebrand who
vowed shortly after the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 that "for every Serb killed,
we will kill 100 Muslims". He served as information minister under Slobodan
Milosevic, the Serbian leader accused of 'Another war would ruin this country
and destroy the future of the Serbian people forever' Aleksandar Vucic war
crimes, and espoused Serbian expansionism in the former Yugoslavia.

But in 2008, Mr Vucic and some colleagues broke with Vojislav Seselj, the
radical nationalist ideologue, and founded the pro-EU Serbian Progressive party.
"You start to ask yourself whether those [radical] things are the only things
worth fighting for," he says of his chequered past.

Today he backs EU membership as a catalyst for change, final proof that Serbia
has escaped the nightmare of the Milosevic years marked by fanatical
nationalism, the Nato bombing of Yugoslavia, hyperinflation and rampant
warlords. "Another war would ruin this country and destroy the future of the
Serbian people forever."

Birthplace of the nation To qualify for EU membership, however, Mr Vucic must
first resolve the disputed status of Kosovo, the ethnic Albanian-majority
southern province whose 2008 declaration of independence from Belgrade has been
recognised by most western powers. Most Serbs, though, still regard it as the
birthplace of the nation and the Serbian Orthodox church. They remain staunchly
opposed to secession. "I'm obsessed with Kosovo," Mr Vucic confesses. "Without
resolving that problem everything I have achieved so far won't be sustainable.
The first crisis will kill us."

Courted by China and the United Arab Emirates as well as Serbia's occasional
ally Russia, Mr Vucic, 48, is now seen by EU leaders, and especially Germany's
Angela Merkel, as the best bet to bring his country into Europe's mainstream.

Critics counter that the EU has struck a Faustian pact with Mr Vucic. The hope
is that the carrot of membership will induce reform, with the prospect of
joining the EU by 2025. But that means meeting stiff conditions on strengthening
democratic institutions and tackling corruption as well as resolving Kosovo.
This year may well prove a decisive test, starting with a summit of EU and
western Balkans leaders in Sofia tomorrow intended to inject fresh impetus into
the bloc's enlargement.

The cynics suspect Mr Vucic is playing along - and that the EU will accommodate
him in the interests of regional security. Having won 55 per cent of the vote in
last year's presidential election, he is the undisputed master of the political
arena. Nine television screens in his office suggest a man who keeps tabs on
everything - and everybody. Some fear he could end up as another Viktor Orban,
Hungary's liberal-turned-nationalist leader, who complied with the EU's rules to
gain membership only to attack it from within. The parallel, says Mr Vucic, is
"99 per cent crap".

Another analogy for some is Viktor Yanukovich, the former Ukrainian president
who played the EU off against Russia - until he was ousted by a popular
uprising. Mr Vucic was Vladimir Putin's guest of honour at the Victory Day
parade in Moscow last week. He starts his working day at 6.30am with a Russian
language lesson. But he rejects the idea that he could become a "fifth column
for Putin in Europe". He says he has always been clear with the Russian
president that "Serbia remains on its EU path".

Overall, Mr Vucic's approach owes something to the legacy of Marshal Tito, the
postwar ruler of Yugoslavia who founded the Non-Aligned Movement and performed a
balancing act between the western powers and the Kremlin.

City of culture Optimists looking for signs of Serbia's EU vocation point to
Novi Sad, the country's second city, located on the northern plains. Here the
Austro-Hungarian empire left a deeper imprint than the Ottomans. In 2022 Novi
Sad will be the European capital of culture, a chance to showcase its thriving
arts scene and creative industries.

Sitting on the terrace of the city's Petrovaradin fortress, looking over the
Danube river, Dusan Kovacevic recalls the "explosion of energy" of the 1998
student protests in the city against Milosevic that marked the beginning of his
downfall. Mr Kovacevic now runs the EXIT music festival, one of the largest in
Europe with 150,000 attendees. Each July, it takes over the fortress in an event
akin to a Glastonbury-on-the-Danube.

EXIT is a showcase for a youthful, multicultural city that avoided the sectarian
violence that consumed most of the former Yugoslavia. In Belgrade, 50 miles to
the south, a very different riverside development is taking shape. Along the
Sava river, 100 hectares of derelict buildings have been cleared for upscale
apartments, luxury hotels and a shopping mall. The (EURO)3.5bn Belgrade
Waterfront project is backed with Emirati money (in Serbian government circles,
they refer to "his Highness", meaning not Serbia's Crown Prince Alexander but
Abu Dhabi's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed whom Mr Vucic has met 20 times by
his own account). But after bulldozers were sent to flatten buildings and goons
cracked a few heads, the development triggered the biggest antigovernment
protests in 20 years. Standing on the roof terrace of an unfinished block of
flats, Sinisa Mali, the young Belgrade mayor, rattles off statistics like a
Manhattan real estate salesman. Mr Mali, who once worked at Credit Suisse, is a
Vucic party man on the rise. "The idea of this project was to create a symbol of
change in Serbia. This is a game changer for us."

For Mr Vucic's critics, the Belgrade Waterfront is a glitzy façade that
distracts from a moribund economy weighed down by cronyism, corruption and shady
finance. Mr Vucic retorts that he has run fiscal surpluses for three years
following an IMF programme during which he cut pensions and froze wages.
Unemployment has halved to 12.9 per cent. The government hopes for 4 per cent
growth in gross domestic product in 2018, after lagging far behind much of
eastern Europe.

Foreign investors are looking for opportunities in sectors such as mining. With
encouragement from both Belgrade and Beijing, China's Hebei Steel took over
Serbia's largest steel plant in Smederevo east of the capital, saving thousands
of jobs.

Mr Vucic cultivates the image of a man who gets things done. Some business
figures agree and generally his opponents are regarded as weak, divided and
tainted by corruption. "It's easy for people to badmouth things and do nothing,"
says Branko Zecevic, a metals and mining entrepreneur.

One bright spot is a booming IT sector in Belgrade which is growing by 30 per
cent a year. But to many it is an exception that proves the rule: the growth
owes much to a cadre of highly educated Serbs who serve foreign clients under
foreign contracts, unhindered by the state or government cronies. It is
"employment by PayPal", says Goran Gocic, a writer.

The worry is the number of departing young Serbs - already running at 30,000 a
year, out of a population of 7m. The exodus, say the president's critics, is a
grim verdict on today's Serbia. Beyond fiscal consolidation and privatisation -
no mean achievements - Mr Vucic has shied away from cleaning up corruption.

The governing party is estimated to have some 600,000 members, almost one-tenth
of the population, who also make up the majority of all public sector
employment. The implication is that membership - and the payment of party dues -
is a prerequisite for employment, promotion or a contract.

"If you want to exist you have to enter the crony system," says Danica Popovic,
a professor of economics at Belgrade University. "Everything remains the same,
only the faces change."

Sasa Radulovic resigned in 2014 as economy minister after four months when his
reform plans were blocked by the previous coalition government. A former
businessman, he describes Serbia as a "partyocracy", where the "ruling party is
looking to get its hands on any institution, any source of money over a certain
threshold, any development that could weaken their grip on power". This
pervasive political control means that "economically Serbia is pretty much
dead", he says.

Mr Radulovic's undiluted pessimism reflects the frustration of being in an
opposition which Mr Vucic has relentlessly squeezed, curtailing broadcast
airtime and controlling political messaging through clever polling techniques.

However, the president does acknowledge that emigration is a serious problem,
while the economy remains vulnerable to a change in foreign investor sentiment,
especially if regional tensions flare up. "We just need to get it done and move
on," says Mr Mali, the Belgrade mayor, referring to a settlement on Kosovo.
"Otherwise everything will go sour."

Joining the club The prospect of EU membership, while distant, remains a vital
factor. For Mr Vucic, it offers a civilising influence not just for his country
but also the western Balkans region with an untapped market of 18m people, if
only political and economic barriers could be lifted.

For Brussels, EU membership offers the leverage to demand democratic standards
such as media freedom, plurality and the rule of law which, some argue, were
skated over in the last round of enlargement to the east, notably for Bulgaria
and Romania.

Tanja Miscevic, a former academic who is now Serbia's chief EU negotiator, says
the country will be held to higher standards than other eastern European states.
"We are the latecomers," she says. "On the one hand, it is a tougher and longer
process. On the other, this is something we have to do for ourselves."

The most pressing test is Kosovo. EU officials want Mr Vucic to sketch out
proposals in the coming months to kick-start talks with Kosovo's leaders. The
28-member bloc is not imposing its own solution because Spain and four others
refuse to recognise Kosovo's independence, largely for fear of setting
secessionist precedents for their own countries.

Serbia's foreign and defence ministers have openly backed the idea of partition,
retaking the northern part of Kosovo where much, but not all, of its Serbian 'We
are not going to give Kosovo away at any price.

We are in favour of joining the EU but not if Kosovo is the price' Patriarch
Irinej population lives. But this is a nonstarter for western powers who fear it
will open a Pandora's box of border disputes in the region.

Nor are they likely to backtrack on independence, as some Serbs imagine. The
most likely settlement would involve autonomy and power-sharing arrangements
akin to Northern Ireland for Serb-dominated areas, in return for recognition of
Kosovo's statehood, but even that would be a step too far for many Serbs and
would still face the hurdle of a referendum, where Mr Vucic could expect fierce
resistance from several quarters, including the Serbian Orthodox church.

"Hello," said Irinej, the 87-year-old Patriarch, as he welcomed the FT in
Belgrade. "You are British or American? Are you going to take Kosovo away from
us? We are not going to give Kosovo away at any price. We are European. We are
in favour of joining the EU but not if Kosovo is the price."

Mr Vucic could still prevail in a referendum, given his political dominance and
grip on the media, says one expert on Kosovo who declined to be named on
security grounds.

Last March, the expert says, an Orthodox priest was arrested together with a
male religious teacher dressed as a woman. In their car, the police happened to
discover 27kg of cannabis. It was too good to be true for Serbia's feverish
tabloids - and also served as a message to the Church: oppose us and we will
discredit you.

Mr Vucic says he is not running in a popularity contest, and has no desire to be
"likeable or loveable". He casts himself not as the last but certainly as the
best hope for his country. "Serbia has produced more history than it could
consume," he says, quoting Winston Churchill, "the most important thing to keep
is peace and tranquillity."

Brussels beckons The EU hopes that the lure of membership will spur reform and
efforts to tackle corruption Southern dispute A key issue will be resolving the
status of Kosovo, which declared independence in 2008 Cronyism burden Critics
say the overwhelming presence of the ruling party stifles economic development

4% Government target for GDP growth in 2018 12.9% The unemployment rate, which
has nearly halved since 2012 30,000 Serbs who leave the country each year

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Aleksandar Vucic, president, says Serbia is on 'its EU path'. Below, an
ethnic Albanian woman passes Serbian police in 1998, and Serbian Patriarch
IrinejBloomberg/Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              109 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Battle for EDP set to test attitudes towards China;
Utilities. Electricity ; Pursuit of Portuguese power company likely to be
lengthy and politically contentious

BYLINE: ANDREW WARD ;ARASH MASSOUDI;PETER WISE

SECTION: COMPANIES AND MARKETS;BUSINESS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 678 words


The rejection by Energias de Portugal of a (EURO)9bn takeover by China Three
Gorges yesterday completed the opening shots in what is likely to be a long
battle for control of Portugal's largest utility.

At stake is much more than just the future of EDP. The proposed deal will test
attitudes to Chinese investment in critical infrastructure on both sides of the
Atlantic at a time of strained trade relations between Beijing and the US.

To complete the acquisition, CTG, the state-owned operator of China's Three
Gorges dam, would need regulatory approval from the 14 countries where EDP
operates, including the US. But it must first persuade the company's
shareholders to accept its bid.

CTG on Friday offered (EURO)3.26 per share for the 76.7 per cent of EDP that it
does not already own. There was little surprise when the EDP board yesterday
dismissed that. The 5.5 per cent premium over the prior day's closing share
price fell short of "what is customary for European utilities where the offerer
has acquired control", the board said.

That is unlikely to be the end of the matter. People familiar with CTG's
thinking said the company remained committed to the deal. Shares in EDP traded 5
per cent above the CTG bid at (EURO)3.44 yesterday afternoon, implying that
investors expected an increased offer from CTG or a rival bidder.

Gas Natural of Spain and Engie of France have both been linked with EDP in the
past year. Enel of Italy and Iberdrola of Spain were mentioned by analysts and
bankers as other potential suitors at a time when Europe's largest utilities
want renewable assets of the kind that make up more than half of EDP's
portfolio.

But while a European takeover of EDP would overcome political concerns in
Brussels and Washington about Chinese investment, it is far from clear that this
would be welcomed in Lisbon.

Chinese companies bought a raft of assets in Portugal after the financial
crisis, including a (EURO)2.7bn investment in EDP by CTG, which today owns 23.3
per cent of the utility. State Grid, the Chinese monopoly power grid operator,
also bought a 25 per cent stake in its Portuguese counterpart REN. These deals
helped raise desperately needed capital after Portugal's 2011 bail-out by the EU
and IMF. Lisbon has since become a vocal opponent of EU curbs on Chinese
investment. António Costa, prime minister, said on Friday that his
administration had no objections to CTG taking control of EDP and praised
Chinese groups for being "good investors in Portugal".

CTG has promised to keep EDP as a separate entity listed in Lisbon, and to use
it as a vehicle for international expansion in renewable power. That is seen by
many in Lisbon as a more attractive option than the country's largest listed
company being broken up or subsumed by a European rival.

Moreover, a European suitor wanting full control would need to persuade CTG to
sell its stake. The Chinese company has no intention of doing that, according to
people familiar with its thinking.

Bankers said other European utilities could end up buying parts of EDP - perhaps
its US assets, for example - to help CTG overcome regulatory concerns. But
people close to CTG said the company wanted to keep EDP as intact as possible
and was not interested in any compromises that left it short of overall control.
Advisers have already been hired to guide CTG through the regulatory maze ahead,
most notably in Washington.

The prospect of another strategic asset falling under Chinese control is likely
to reinforce calls from some European capitals, including Paris and Berlin, for
the EU to be given its own powers to review and block foreign takeovers.

The influx of Chinese investment into Portugal was an unintended consequence of
Portugal's EU bailout, which was conditional on state assets being opened to
foreign investment. A bid by Eon, the German utility, for the government stake
in EDP received personal backing from Angela Merkel, German chancellor, in 2011
but Lisbon sold to CTG instead. This set the stage for the latest drama, which
bankers said would take months to play out.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Holding the line: EDP's Alqueva dam in southern Portugal. Renewables
make up most of its portfolio- Mario Proenca/Bloomberg

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              110 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

'The first crisis will kill us';
An ultra-nationalist firebrand in his youth, Aleksandar Vucic now sees EU
membership as a catalyst for economic reform and political stability. But to
qualify, the president must resolve the status of Kosovo. By Lionel Barber and
Ben Hall

BYLINE: Lionel Barber ;BenHall

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 2244 words


F rom the balcony of his presidential office in Belgrade's sombre New Palace,
Aleksandar Vucic surveys the neatly trimmed gardens below. On this spot, he
whispers, King Alexander and Queen Draga of Serbia were defenestrated in an army
coup in 1903. When the king clung to the balustrade his fingers were hacked off;
his wife's body mutilated.

"There is no Alexander who survived in power," says Mr Vucic, with a touch of
melodrama. His words are a not-so-subtle reminder of the constraints the
selfstyled moderniser faces as he edges along the path of economic reform,
political stabilisation and, one day, potential EU membership.

A previous pro-western Serbian leader, Zoran Djindjic, was himself assassinated
in 2003, a suspected victim of organised crime. Serbia's western destiny is also
far from assured: as a "swing state" in the Balkans it has traditionally hedged
its bets between the European powers, Russia and, in the 19th century, Ottoman
Turkey.

Moreover, Mr Vucic, a bear of a man at 6ft 6in (1.99m) tall, remains an
ambiguous figure. He started in politics an ultra-nationalist firebrand who
vowed shortly after the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 that "for every Serb killed,
we will kill 100 Muslims". He served as information minister under Slobodan
Milosevic, the Serbian leader accused of 'Another war would ruin this country
and destroy the future of the Serbian people forever' Aleksandar Vucic war
crimes, and espoused Serbian expansionism in the former Yugoslavia.

But in 2008, Mr Vucic and some colleagues broke with Vojislav Seselj, the
radical nationalist ideologue, and founded the pro-EU Serbian Progressive party.
"You start to ask yourself whether those [radical] things are the only things
worth fighting for," he says of his chequered past.

Today he backs EU membership as a catalyst for change, final proof that Serbia
has escaped the nightmare of the Milosevic years marked by fanatical
nationalism, the Nato bombing of Yugoslavia, hyperinflation and rampant
warlords. "Another war would ruin this country and destroy the future of the
Serbian people forever."

Birthplace of the nation To qualify for EU membership, however, Mr Vucic must
first resolve the disputed status of Kosovo, the ethnic Albanian-majority
southern province whose 2008 declaration of independence from Belgrade has been
recognised by most western powers. Most Serbs, though, still regard it as the
birthplace of the nation and the Serbian Orthodox church. They remain staunchly
opposed to secession. "I'm obsessed with Kosovo," Mr Vucic confesses. "Without
resolving that problem everything I have achieved so far won't be sustainable.
The first crisis will kill us."

Courted by China and the United Arab Emirates as well as Serbia's occasional
ally Russia, Mr Vucic, 48, is now seen by EU leaders, and especially Germany's
Angela Merkel, as the best bet to bring his country into Europe's mainstream.

Critics counter that the EU has struck a Faustian pact with Mr Vucic. The hope
is that the carrot of membership will induce reform, with the prospect of
joining the EU by 2025. But that means meeting stiff conditions on strengthening
democratic institutions and tackling corruption as well as resolving Kosovo.
This year may well prove a decisive test, starting with a summit of EU and
western Balkans leaders in Sofia tomorrow intended to inject fresh impetus into
the bloc's enlargement.

The cynics suspect Mr Vucic is playing along - and that the EU will accommodate
him in the interests of regional security. Having won 55 per cent of the vote in
last year's presidential election, he is the undisputed master of the political
arena. Nine television screens in his office suggest a man who keeps tabs on
everything - and everybody. Some fear he could end up as another Viktor Orban,
Hungary's liberal-turned-nationalist leader, who complied with the EU's rules to
gain membership only to attack it from within. The parallel, says Mr Vucic, is
"99 per cent crap".

Another analogy for some is Viktor Yanukovich, the former Ukrainian president
who played the EU off against Russia - until he was ousted by a popular
uprising. Mr Vucic was Vladimir Putin's guest of honour at the Victory Day
parade in Moscow last week. He starts his working day at 6.30am with a Russian
language lesson. But he rejects the idea that he could become a "fifth column
for Putin in Europe". He says he has always been clear with the Russian
president that "Serbia remains on its EU path".

Overall, Mr Vucic's approach owes something to the legacy of Marshal Tito, the
postwar ruler of Yugoslavia who founded the Non-Aligned Movement and performed a
balancing act between the western powers and the Kremlin.

City of culture Optimists looking for signs of Serbia's EU vocation point to
Novi Sad, the country's second city, located on the northern plains. Here the
Austro-Hungarian empire left a deeper imprint than the Ottomans. In 2022 Novi
Sad will be the European capital of culture, a chance to showcase its thriving
arts scene and creative industries.

Sitting on the terrace of the city's Petrovaradin fortress, looking over the
Danube river, Dusan Kovacevic recalls the "explosion of energy" of the 1998
student protests in the city against Milosevic that marked the beginning of his
downfall. Mr Kovacevic now runs the EXIT music festival, one of the largest in
Europe with 150,000 attendees. Each July, it takes over the fortress in an event
akin to a Glastonbury-on-the-Danube.

EXIT is a showcase for a youthful, multicultural city that avoided the sectarian
violence that consumed most of the former Yugoslavia. In Belgrade, 50 miles to
the south, a very different riverside development is taking shape. Along the
Sava river, 100 hectares of derelict buildings have been cleared for upscale
apartments, luxury hotels and a shopping mall. The (EURO)3.5bn Belgrade
Waterfront project is backed with Emirati money (in Serbian government circles,
they refer to "his Highness", meaning not Serbia's Crown Prince Alexander but
Abu Dhabi's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed whom Mr Vucic has met 20 times by
his own account). But after bulldozers were sent to flatten buildings and goons
cracked a few heads, the development triggered the biggest antigovernment
protests in 20 years. Standing on the roof terrace of an unfinished block of
flats, Sinisa Mali, the young Belgrade mayor, rattles off statistics like a
Manhattan real estate salesman. Mr Mali, who once worked at Credit Suisse, is a
Vucic party man on the rise. "The idea of this project was to create a symbol of
change in Serbia. This is a game changer for us."

For Mr Vucic's critics, the Belgrade Waterfront is a glitzy façade that
distracts from a moribund economy weighed down by cronyism, corruption and shady
finance. Mr Vucic retorts that he has run fiscal surpluses for three years
following an IMF programme during which he cut pensions and froze wages.
Unemployment has halved to 12.9 per cent. The government hopes for 4 per cent
growth in gross domestic product in 2018, after lagging far behind much of
eastern Europe.

Foreign investors are looking for opportunities in sectors such as mining. With
encouragement from both Belgrade and Beijing, China's Hebei Steel took over
Serbia's largest steel plant in Smederevo east of the capital, saving thousands
of jobs.

Mr Vucic cultivates the image of a man who gets things done. Some business
figures agree and generally his opponents are regarded as weak, divided and
tainted by corruption. "It's easy for people to badmouth things and do nothing,"
says Branko Zecevic, a metals and mining entrepreneur.

One bright spot is a booming IT sector in Belgrade which is growing by 30 per
cent a year. But to many it is an exception that proves the rule: the growth
owes much to a cadre of highly educated Serbs who serve foreign clients under
foreign contracts, unhindered by the state or government cronies. It is
"employment by PayPal", says Goran Gocic, a writer.

The worry is the number of departing young Serbs - already running at 30,000 a
year, out of a population of 7m. The exodus, say the president's critics, is a
grim verdict on today's Serbia. Beyond fiscal consolidation and privatisation -
no mean achievements - Mr Vucic has shied away from cleaning up corruption.

The governing party is estimated to have some 600,000 members, almost one-tenth
of the population, who also make up the majority of all public sector
employment. The implication is that membership - and the payment of party dues -
is a prerequisite for employment, promotion or a contract.

"If you want to exist you have to enter the crony system," says Danica Popovic,
a professor of economics at Belgrade University. "Everything remains the same,
only the faces change."

Sasa Radulovic resigned in 2014 as economy minister after four months when his
reform plans were blocked by the previous coalition government. A former
businessman, he describes Serbia as a "partyocracy", where the "ruling party is
looking to get its hands on any institution, any source of money over a certain
threshold, any development that could weaken their grip on power". This
pervasive political control means that "economically Serbia is pretty much
dead", he says.

Mr Radulovic's undiluted pessimism reflects the frustration of being in an
opposition which Mr Vucic has relentlessly squeezed, curtailing broadcast
airtime and controlling political messaging through clever polling techniques.

However, the president does acknowledge that emigration is a serious problem,
while the economy remains vulnerable to a change in foreign investor sentiment,
especially if regional tensions flare up. "We just need to get it done and move
on," says Mr Mali, the Belgrade mayor, referring to a settlement on Kosovo.
"Otherwise everything will go sour."

Joining the club The prospect of EU membership, while distant, remains a vital
factor. For Mr Vucic, it offers a civilising influence not just for his country
but also the western Balkans region with an untapped market of 18m people, if
only political and economic barriers could be lifted.

For Brussels, EU membership offers the leverage to demand democratic standards
such as media freedom, plurality and the rule of law which, some argue, were
skated over in the last round of enlargement to the east, notably for Bulgaria
and Romania.

Tanja Miscevic, a former academic who is now Serbia's chief EU negotiator, says
the country will be held to higher standards than other eastern European states.
"We are the latecomers," she says. "On the one hand, it is a tougher and longer
process. On the other, this is something we have to do for ourselves."

The most pressing test is Kosovo. EU officials want Mr Vucic to sketch out
proposals in the coming months to kick-start talks with Kosovo's leaders. The
28-member bloc is not imposing its own solution because Spain and four others
refuse to recognise Kosovo's independence, largely for fear of setting
secessionist precedents for their own countries.

Serbia's foreign and defence ministers have openly backed the idea of partition,
retaking the northern part of Kosovo where much, but not all, of its Serbian 'We
are not going to give Kosovo away at any price.

We are in favour of joining the EU but not if Kosovo is the price' Patriarch
Irinej population lives. But this is a nonstarter for western powers who fear it
will open a Pandora's box of border disputes in the region.

Nor are they likely to backtrack on independence, as some Serbs imagine. The
most likely settlement would involve autonomy and power-sharing arrangements
akin to Northern Ireland for Serb-dominated areas, in return for recognition of
Kosovo's statehood, but even that would be a step too far for many Serbs and
would still face the hurdle of a referendum, where Mr Vucic could expect fierce
resistance from several quarters, including the Serbian Orthodox church.

"Hello," said Irinej, the 87-year-old Patriarch, as he welcomed the FT in
Belgrade. "You are British or American? Are you going to take Kosovo away from
us? We are not going to give Kosovo away at any price. We are European. We are
in favour of joining the EU but not if Kosovo is the price."

Mr Vucic could still prevail in a referendum, given his political dominance and
grip on the media, says one expert on Kosovo who declined to be named on
security grounds.

Last March, the expert says, an Orthodox priest was arrested together with a
male religious teacher dressed as a woman. In their car, the police happened to
discover 27kg of cannabis. It was too good to be true for Serbia's feverish
tabloids - and also served as a message to the Church: oppose us and we will
discredit you.

Mr Vucic says he is not running in a popularity contest, and has no desire to be
"likeable or loveable". He casts himself not as the last but certainly as the
best hope for his country. "Serbia has produced more history than it could
consume," he says, quoting Winston Churchill, "the most important thing to keep
is peace and tranquillity."

Brussels beckons The EU hopes that the lure of membership will spur reform and
efforts to tackle corruption Southern dispute A key issue will be resolving the
status of Kosovo, which declared independence in 2008 Cronyism burden Critics
say the overwhelming presence of the ruling party stifles economic development

4% Government target for GDP growth in 2018 12.9% The unemployment rate, which
has nearly halved since 2012 30,000 Serbs who leave the country each year

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Aleksandar Vucic, president, saysSerbia is on 'its EU path'. Below, an
ethnic Albanian woman passes Serbian police in 1998, and Serbian Patriarch
Irinej Bloomberg/Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              111 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

Battle for EDP set to test attitudes towards China;
Utilities. Electricity ; Pursuit of Portuguese power company likely to be
lengthy and politically contentious

BYLINE: ANDREW WARD ;ARASH MASSOUDI ;PETER WISE

SECTION: COMPANIES AND MARKETS;BUSINESS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 678 words


The rejection by Energias de Portugal of a (EURO)9bn takeover by China Three
Gorges yesterday completed the opening shots in what is likely to be a long
battle for control of Portugal's largest utility.

At stake is much more than just the future of EDP. The proposed deal will test
attitudes to Chinese investment in critical infrastructure on both sides of the
Atlantic at a time of strained trade relations between Beijing and the US.

To complete the acquisition, CTG, the state-owned operator of China's Three
Gorges dam, would need regulatory approval from the 14 countries where EDP
operates, including the US. But it must first persuade the company's
shareholders to accept its bid.

CTG on Friday offered (EURO)3.26 per share for the 76.7 per cent of EDP that it
does not already own. There was little surprise when the EDP board yesterday
dismissed that. The 5.5 per cent premium over the prior day's closing share
price fell short of "what is customary for European utilities where the offerer
has acquired control", the board said.

That is unlikely to be the end of the matter. People familiar with CTG's
thinking said the company remained committed to the deal. Shares in EDP traded 5
per cent above the CTG bid at (EURO)3.44 yesterday afternoon, implying that
investors expected an increased offer from CTG or a rival bidder.

Gas Natural of Spain and Engie of France have both been linked with EDP in the
past year. Enel of Italy and Iberdrola of Spain were mentioned by analysts and
bankers as other potential suitors at a time when Europe's largest utilities
want renewable assets of the kind that make up more than half of EDP's
portfolio.

But while a European takeover of EDP would overcome political concerns in
Brussels and Washington about Chinese investment, it is far from clear that this
would be welcomed in Lisbon.

Chinese companies bought a raft of assets in Portugal after the financial
crisis, including a (EURO)2.7bn investment in EDP by CTG, which today owns 23.3
per cent of the utility. State Grid, the Chinese monopoly power grid operator,
also bought a 25 per cent stake in its Portuguese counterpart REN. These deals
helped raise desperately needed capital after Portugal's 2011 bail-out by the EU
and IMF. Lisbon has since become a vocal opponent of EU curbs on Chinese
investment. António Costa, prime minister, said on Friday that his
administration had no objections to CTG taking control of EDP and praised
Chinese groups for being "good investors in Portugal".

CTG has promised to keep EDP as a separate entity listed in Lisbon, and to use
it as a vehicle for international expansion in renewable power. That is seen by
many in Lisbon as a more attractive option than the country's largest listed
company being broken up or subsumed by a European rival.

Moreover, a European suitor wanting full control would need to persuade CTG to
sell its stake. The Chinese company has no intention of doing that, according to
people familiar with its thinking.

Bankers said other European utilities could end up buying parts of EDP - perhaps
its US assets, for example - to help CTG overcome regulatory concerns. But
people close to CTG said the company wanted to keep EDP as intact as possible
and was not interested in any compromises that left it short of overall control.
Advisers have already been hired to guide CTG through the regulatory maze ahead,
most notably in Washington.

The prospect of another strategic asset falling under Chinese control is likely
to reinforce calls from some European capitals, including Paris and Berlin, for
the EU to be given its own powers to review and block foreign takeovers.

The influx of Chinese investment into Portugal was an unintended consequence of
Portugal's EU bailout, which was conditional on state assets being opened to
foreign investment. A bid by Eon, the German utility, for the government stake
in EDP received personal backing from Angela Merkel, German chancellor, in 2011
but Lisbon sold to CTG instead. This set the stage for the latest drama, which
bankers said would take months to play out.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Holding the line: EDP's Alqueva dam in southern Portugal. Renewables
make up most of its portfolio- Mario Proenca/Bloomberg

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              112 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                       Financial Times (London, England)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                  USA Edition

'The first crisis will kill us';
FT BIG READ. SERBIA ; An ultra-nationalist firebrand in his youth, Aleksandar
Vucic now sees EU membership as a catalyst for economic reform and political
stability. But to qualify, the president must resolve the status of Kosovo. By
Lionel Barber and Ben Hall

BYLINE: Lionel Barber ;BenHall

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 2244 words


F rom the balcony of his presidential office in Belgrade's sombre New Palace,
Aleksandar Vucic surveys the neatly trimmed gardens below. On this spot, he
whispers, King Alexander and Queen Draga of Serbia were defenestrated in an army
coup in 1903. When the king clung to the balustrade his fingers were hacked off;
his wife's body mutilated.

"There is no Alexander who survived in power," says Mr Vucic, with a touch of
melodrama. His words are a not-so-subtle reminder of the constraints the
selfstyled moderniser faces as he edges along the path of economic reform,
political stabilisation and, one day, potential EU membership.

A previous pro-western Serbian leader, Zoran Djindjic, was himself assassinated
in 2003, a suspected victim of organised crime. Serbia's western destiny is also
far from assured: as a "swing state" in the Balkans it has traditionally hedged
its bets between the European powers, Russia and, in the 19th century, Ottoman
Turkey.

Moreover, Mr Vucic, a bear of a man at 6ft 6in (1.99m) tall, remains an
ambiguous figure. He started in politics an ultra-nationalist firebrand who
vowed shortly after the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 that "for every Serb killed,
we will kill 100 Muslims". He served as information minister under Slobodan
Milosevic, the Serbian leader accused of 'Another war would ruin this country
and destroy the future of the Serbian people forever' Aleksandar Vucic war
crimes, and espoused Serbian expansionism in the former Yugoslavia.

But in 2008, Mr Vucic and some colleagues broke with Vojislav Seselj, the
radical nationalist ideologue, and founded the pro-EU Serbian Progressive party.
"You start to ask yourself whether those [radical] things are the only things
worth fighting for," he says of his chequered past.

Today he backs EU membership as a catalyst for change, final proof that Serbia
has escaped the nightmare of the Milosevic years marked by fanatical
nationalism, the Nato bombing of Yugoslavia, hyperinflation and rampant
warlords. "Another war would ruin this country and destroy the future of the
Serbian people forever."

Birthplace of the nation To qualify for EU membership, however, Mr Vucic must
first resolve the disputed status of Kosovo, the ethnic Albanian-majority
southern province whose 2008 declaration of independence from Belgrade has been
recognised by most western powers. Most Serbs, though, still regard it as the
birthplace of the nation and the Serbian Orthodox church. They remain staunchly
opposed to secession. "I'm obsessed with Kosovo," Mr Vucic confesses. "Without
resolving that problem everything I have achieved so far won't be sustainable.
The first crisis will kill us."

Courted by China and the United Arab Emirates as well as Serbia's occasional
ally Russia, Mr Vucic, 48, is now seen by EU leaders, and especially Germany's
Angela Merkel, as the best bet to bring his country into Europe's mainstream.

Critics counter that the EU has struck a Faustian pact with Mr Vucic. The hope
is that the carrot of membership will induce reform, with the prospect of
joining the EU by 2025. But that means meeting stiff conditions on strengthening
democratic institutions and tackling corruption as well as resolving Kosovo.
This year may well prove a decisive test, starting with a summit of EU and
western Balkans leaders in Sofia tomorrow intended to inject fresh impetus into
the bloc's enlargement.

The cynics suspect Mr Vucic is playing along - and that the EU will accommodate
him in the interests of regional security. Having won 55 per cent of the vote in
last year's presidential election, he is the undisputed master of the political
arena. Nine television screens in his office suggest a man who keeps tabs on
everything - and everybody. Some fear he could end up as another Viktor Orban,
Hungary's liberal-turned-nationalist leader, who complied with the EU's rules to
gain membership only to attack it from within. The parallel, says Mr Vucic, is
"99 per cent crap".

Another analogy for some is Viktor Yanukovich, the former Ukrainian president
who played the EU off against Russia - until he was ousted by a popular
uprising. Mr Vucic was Vladimir Putin's guest of honour at the Victory Day
parade in Moscow last week. He starts his working day at 6.30am with a Russian
language lesson. But he rejects the idea that he could become a "fifth column
for Putin in Europe". He says he has always been clear with the Russian
president that "Serbia remains on its EU path".

Overall, Mr Vucic's approach owes something to the legacy of Marshal Tito, the
postwar ruler of Yugoslavia who founded the Non-Aligned Movement and performed a
balancing act between the western powers and the Kremlin.

City of culture Optimists looking for signs of Serbia's EU vocation point to
Novi Sad, the country's second city, located on the northern plains. Here the
Austro-Hungarian empire left a deeper imprint than the Ottomans. In 2022 Novi
Sad will be the European capital of culture, a chance to showcase its thriving
arts scene and creative industries.

Sitting on the terrace of the city's Petrovaradin fortress, looking over the
Danube river, Dusan Kovacevic recalls the "explosion of energy" of the 1998
student protests in the city against Milosevic that marked the beginning of his
downfall. Mr Kovacevic now runs the EXIT music festival, one of the largest in
Europe with 150,000 attendees. Each July, it takes over the fortress in an event
akin to a Glastonbury-on-the-Danube.

EXIT is a showcase for a youthful, multicultural city that avoided the sectarian
violence that consumed most of the former Yugoslavia. In Belgrade, 50 miles to
the south, a very different riverside development is taking shape. Along the
Sava river, 100 hectares of derelict buildings have been cleared for upscale
apartments, luxury hotels and a shopping mall. The (EURO)3.5bn Belgrade
Waterfront project is backed with Emirati money (in Serbian government circles,
they refer to "his Highness", meaning not Serbia's Crown Prince Alexander but
Abu Dhabi's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed whom Mr Vucic has met 20 times by
his own account). But after bulldozers were sent to flatten buildings and goons
cracked a few heads, the development triggered the biggest antigovernment
protests in 20 years. Standing on the roof terrace of an unfinished block of
flats, Sinisa Mali, the young Belgrade mayor, rattles off statistics like a
Manhattan real estate salesman. Mr Mali, who once worked at Credit Suisse, is a
Vucic party man on the rise. "The idea of this project was to create a symbol of
change in Serbia. This is a game changer for us."

For Mr Vucic's critics, the Belgrade Waterfront is a glitzy façade that
distracts from a moribund economy weighed down by cronyism, corruption and shady
finance. Mr Vucic retorts that he has run fiscal surpluses for three years
following an IMF programme during which he cut pensions and froze wages.
Unemployment has halved to 12.9 per cent. The government hopes for 4 per cent
growth in gross domestic product in 2018, after lagging far behind much of
eastern Europe.

Foreign investors are looking for opportunities in sectors such as mining. With
encouragement from both Belgrade and Beijing, China's Hebei Steel took over
Serbia's largest steel plant in Smederevo east of the capital, saving thousands
of jobs.

Mr Vucic cultivates the image of a man who gets things done. Some business
figures agree and generally his opponents are regarded as weak, divided and
tainted by corruption. "It's easy for people to badmouth things and do nothing,"
says Branko Zecevic, a metals and mining entrepreneur.

One bright spot is a booming IT sector in Belgrade which is growing by 30 per
cent a year. But to many it is an exception that proves the rule: the growth
owes much to a cadre of highly educated Serbs who serve foreign clients under
foreign contracts, unhindered by the state or government cronies. It is
"employment by PayPal", says Goran Gocic, a writer.

The worry is the number of departing young Serbs - already running at 30,000 a
year, out of a population of 7m. The exodus, say the president's critics, is a
grim verdict on today's Serbia. Beyond fiscal consolidation and privatisation -
no mean achievements - Mr Vucic has shied away from cleaning up corruption.

The governing party is estimated to have some 600,000 members, almost one-tenth
of the population, who also make up the majority of all public sector
employment. The implication is that membership - and the payment of party dues -
is a prerequisite for employment, promotion or a contract.

"If you want to exist you have to enter the crony system," says Danica Popovic,
a professor of economics at Belgrade University. "Everything remains the same,
only the faces change."

Sasa Radulovic resigned in 2014 as economy minister after four months when his
reform plans were blocked by the previous coalition government. A former
businessman, he describes Serbia as a "partyocracy", where the "ruling party is
looking to get its hands on any institution, any source of money over a certain
threshold, any development that could weaken their grip on power". This
pervasive political control means that "economically Serbia is pretty much
dead", he says.

Mr Radulovic's undiluted pessimism reflects the frustration of being in an
opposition which Mr Vucic has relentlessly squeezed, curtailing broadcast
airtime and controlling political messaging through clever polling techniques.

However, the president does acknowledge that emigration is a serious problem,
while the economy remains vulnerable to a change in foreign investor sentiment,
especially if regional tensions flare up. "We just need to get it done and move
on," says Mr Mali, the Belgrade mayor, referring to a settlement on Kosovo.
"Otherwise everything will go sour."

Joining the club The prospect of EU membership, while distant, remains a vital
factor. For Mr Vucic, it offers a civilising influence not just for his country
but also the western Balkans region with an untapped market of 18m people, if
only political and economic barriers could be lifted.

For Brussels, EU membership offers the leverage to demand democratic standards
such as media freedom, plurality and the rule of law which, some argue, were
skated over in the last round of enlargement to the east, notably for Bulgaria
and Romania.

Tanja Miscevic, a former academic who is now Serbia's chief EU negotiator, says
the country will be held to higher standards than other eastern European states.
"We are the latecomers," she says. "On the one hand, it is a tougher and longer
process. On the other, this is something we have to do for ourselves."

The most pressing test is Kosovo. EU officials want Mr Vucic to sketch out
proposals in the coming months to kick-start talks with Kosovo's leaders. The
28-member bloc is not imposing its own solution because Spain and four others
refuse to recognise Kosovo's independence, largely for fear of setting
secessionist precedents for their own countries.

Serbia's foreign and defence ministers have openly backed the idea of partition,
retaking the northern part of Kosovo where much, but not all, of its Serbian 'We
are not going to give Kosovo away at any price.

We are in favour of joining the EU but not if Kosovo is the price' Patriarch
Irinej population lives. But this is a nonstarter for western powers who fear it
will open a Pandora's box of border disputes in the region.

Nor are they likely to backtrack on independence, as some Serbs imagine. The
most likely settlement would involve autonomy and power-sharing arrangements
akin to Northern Ireland for Serb-dominated areas, in return for recognition of
Kosovo's statehood, but even that would be a step too far for many Serbs and
would still face the hurdle of a referendum, where Mr Vucic could expect fierce
resistance from several quarters, including the Serbian Orthodox church.

"Hello," said Irinej, the 87-year-old Patriarch, as he welcomed the FT in
Belgrade. "You are British or American? Are you going to take Kosovo away from
us? We are not going to give Kosovo away at any price. We are European. We are
in favour of joining the EU but not if Kosovo is the price."

Mr Vucic could still prevail in a referendum, given his political dominance and
grip on the media, says one expert on Kosovo who declined to be named on
security grounds.

Last March, the expert says, an Orthodox priest was arrested together with a
male religious teacher dressed as a woman. In their car, the police happened to
discover 27kg of cannabis. It was too good to be true for Serbia's feverish
tabloids - and also served as a message to the Church: oppose us and we will
discredit you.

Mr Vucic says he is not running in a popularity contest, and has no desire to be
"likeable or loveable". He casts himself not as the last but certainly as the
best hope for his country. "Serbia has produced more history than it could
consume," he says, quoting Winston Churchill, "the most important thing to keep
is peace and tranquillity."

Brussels beckons The EU hopes that the lure of membership will spur reform and
efforts to tackle corruption Southern dispute A key issue will be resolving the
status of Kosovo, which declared independence in 2008 Cronyism burden Critics
say the overwhelming presence of the ruling party stifles economic development

4% Government target for GDP growth in 2018 12.9% The unemployment rate, which
has nearly halved since 2012 30,000 Serbs who leave the country each year

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Aleksandar Vucic, president, says Serbia is on 'its EU path'. Below, an
ethnic Albanian woman passes Serbian police in 1998, and Serbian Patriarch
IrinejBloomberg/Reuters

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: FTN


                   Copyright 2018 The Financial Times Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              113 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 16, 2018 Wednesday 9:54 PM GMT

Morning mail: European council president condemns 'capricious' Trump;
Thursday: Donald Tusk savages US leader over Iran. Plus, what it's like to live
on welfare in Australia · Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian
Australia every morning

BYLINE: Eleanor Ainge Roy

SECTION: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:2

LENGTH: 1297 words


Good morning, this is Eleanor Ainge Roy bringing you the main stories and
must-reads on Thursday 17 May.

Top stories

The threat posed by Donald Trump's administration has been likened to that of
China and Russia by the European council president, Donald Tusk, as he condemned
the US's withdrawal from the Iran deal and the rising threat of a transatlantic
trade war. Tusk offered a withering commentary on the chaotic US administration,
saying: "We are witnessing today a new phenomenon: the capricious assertiveness
of the American administration. Looking at the latest decisions of President
Trump, some could even think, 'With friends like that, who needs enemies?'"

Sign up to receive the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning

It was clear, Tusk suggested, that Washington could no longer be relied upon. He
called on other European leaders to unite behind the tough line taken by the UK,
France and Germany - Theresa May, Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel have
resolved to stick with the joint comprehensive plan of action with Iran, despite
the threats of US sanctions against European businesses.

Julian Assange's intervention on Catalan independence created a rift between the
WikiLeaks founder and the Ecuadorian government, which has hosted Assange for
nearly six years in its London embassy, the Guardian has learned. Anonymous
sources said Assange's support for the Catalan separatists led to a backlash
from Spain, which in turn angered Ecuador's government, who responded by cutting
Assange's internet access in March for breaching an agreement not to interfere
with other states. Ecuador has been looking to find a solution to what it
increasingly sees as an untenable situation: hosting one of the world's most
wanted men.

A "lack of interest" in running for office has delayed the Liberal preselection
in the Longman byelection,  with party insiders shocked such a "winnable,
potentially long-term seat" has attracted so few candidates. Meanwhile, Labor is
positioning itself to ruin the Liberals' chances of taking Mayo from the
crossbencher Rebekha Sharkie, with plans to run a candidate in the conservative
South Australian seat to boost Sharkie's vote through preferences, a move that
will be bolstered by the Greens.

The shadow environment minister, Tony Burke, has declared that Labor is not
afraid to change the law as 371 local branches endorse a motion calling on the
ALP to set up an independent agency responsible for proactive environmental
protection. A grassroots campaign leading up to Labor's national conference in
July spearheaded by the activist group the Labor Environment Action Network is
building support from rank-and-file members for the creation of a federal
environmental protection agency, a regulator that could be the decision maker
for approvals rather than the environment minister.

Water shortages are likely to be the key environmental challenge of this
century,                     scientists from Nasa have warned, as a
groundbreaking study reveals a drying-out of swaths of the globe between the
tropics and the high latitudes. Nineteen areas have been identified where water
depletion has been dramatic. Australia is among the global hotspots where
overuse of resources has caused a serious decline. "What we are witnessing is
major hydrologic change," said James Famiglietti, of the Nasa Jet Propulsion
Laboratory in California.

Sport

Heather Reid was the chief executive of the ACT football federation for 12 years
and the first woman to lead an Australian state football association.  At the
time, Australian football had 11% women at state and territory leadership levels
- one position out of nine. "I don't like people talking about percentages of
gendered representation," she says. "I like to know the real numbers because
they tell the true story."

Today is International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia, and for
the Australian rules footballer Hannah Mouncey, it offers a good chance to
reflect on what the past six months have taught her.

Thinking time

"Writing about being on Centrelink payments is a frightening prospect," says
Nijole Naujoka in the first piece of a new Guardian Australia series in which we
invite brave new writers to share the day-to-day challenges of living on the
breadline. "I am very aware of the possible judgment and backlash I may get."
That fear of judgment is the theme of Naujoka's first reflection on living on
welfare in Australia.

"Since last week's budget the treasurer, Scott Morrison, has been telling voters
his $140bn income tax plan 'deals with' bracket creep,"
writes Gareth Hutchens. "It doesn't. It's a proposed attempt to provide a
temporary solution to the problem, not a permanent one." Guardian Australia's
politics and economics correspondent argues that "the government could eradicate
bracket creep if it wanted to, but it doesn't. Neither does Labor. Both major
parties have exploited it for decades and they don't intend to stop. Why?"

The life coach and bestselling self-help writer Jen Sincero says she can make
you a badass  - but has it worked for her millions of readers, or is it just a
modern twist on positive thinking? Sincero's You Are a Badass is a bestseller in
the US and is making waves in the UK, but her brand of straight-talking tough
love aimed at helping you escape your "sucky life" and get rich can rub those in
the psychology and wellbeing fields the wrong way.

What's he done now?

Donald Trump has acknowledged for the first time that he made a payment of
$100,000 to his lawyer Michael Cohen in 2016  - a payment that is understood to
have been passed on to the porn star Stormy Daniels as hush money for staying
quiet about her liaison with Trump. The information was contained in financial
statements submitted by the president to the US Office of Government Ethics, CNN
reports.

Media roundup

The information officer in the new home affairs super ministry ordered staff to
delete information relating to a freedom of information request when he was
employed at the NSW Transport Agency, the Sydney Morning Herald reports. Police
in Tasmania say vulnerable, low-level drug addicts are being used and abused by
bikie gangs, and are forced to commit crimes and sex acts to repay drug debts,
according tothe Hobart Mercury. And the  ABC reports that Australian women are
being subject to outdated and invasive hysterectomies because gynaecologists
have not upgraded their skills.

Coming up

The broadcaster Alan Jones is expected to take stand today in the lengthy
defamation trial that he and his employer, Harbour Radio, and the journalist
Nicholas Cater are defending against the Wagner family over broadcasts about the
2011 Lockyer Valley floods.

A record number of Melburnians will spend the night on the concrete floor of the
Melbourne Cricket Ground in a show of support for young people experiencing
homelessness in Victoria.

Supporting the Guardian

We'd like to acknowledge our generous supporters who enable us to keep reporting
on the critical stories. If you value what we do and would like to help, please
make a contribution or become a supporter today. Thank you.

Sign up

If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email
inbox every weekday, sign up here.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              114 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 16, 2018 Wednesday 5:42 PM GMT

Özil and Gündogan's Erdogan picture causes anger in Germany;
Premier League footballers met Turkish president during his UK state visit

BYLINE: Philip Oltermann in Berlin

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Version:1

LENGTH: 609 words


Two German footballers of Turkish heritage posing for photographs with the
Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, have reignited a debate over dual
citizenship and national identity in Germany, as the country embarks on a bid to
defend its World Cup title.

Midfielders Mesut Özil and Ilkay Gündogan, who currently play for Arsenal and
Manchester City in the Premier League and are both set to represent their birth
country at the tournament in Russia this summer, were criticised by politicians
including the chancellor, Angela Merkel, for meeting with Erdogan during his
visit to the UK.

In a meeting at London's Four Seasons hotel on Sunday evening, which was also
attended by German-born Everton striker Cenk Tosun, the players handed signed
club shirts to the leader of Turkey's Justice and Development (AKP) party. The
shirt given by Gündogan, who holds German and Turkish passports, bore the
message: "To my president, with my respects."

The pictures amount to a PR coup for Erdogan, who is seeking to extend his
15-year rule in a snap poll on 24 June but is banned from holding election
campaign rallies on German soil. About 1.2 million people in Germany with a
Turkish background are eligible to vote in the election.

Diplomatic relations between Germany and Turkey were already frayed over the
one-year imprisonment of recently released German-Turkish journalist Deniz Yücel
.  But  the backlash to the incident has been even louder because Özil and
Gündogan have both been championed as successful examples of Germany's policy of
cultural integration.

World Cup winner Özil was awarded an "integration" prize by the Hubert Burda
Media group in 2010. That year the president of Germany's football association
(DFB) had complained about politicising football after Merkel made an
unscheduled visit to the Germany changing room following a 3-0 win over Turkey.
Photographs of the German chancellor shaking goalscorer Özil's hand were
distributed by the government to the press afterwards.

After Sunday's incident, the chancellor's spokesperson Steffen Seibert said the
situation had "thrown up questions and invited misunderstandings", while DFB
chief Reinhard Grindel said in a statement that it was "not a good thing" for
the players to pose with Erdogan.

"The DFB of course respects the special situation for our players with migrant
backgrounds, but football and the DFB stands for values that Mr Erdogan does not
sufficiently respect," Grindel said.

While Arsenal star Özil has not commented on the affair, Gündogan has defended
the meeting as a "gesture of politeness" that he had made "out of respect for
the president's office". Critics say Gündogan could have shown his respect
without allowing himself to be used as a political tool, pointing out that
Liverpool FC's Germany international Emre Can had reportedly declined an
invitation from Erdogan's team.

Germany team manager Joachim  Löw has emerged as one of the few forgiving voices
in the debate, saying people with a migrant background sometimes had "two hearts
beating in their chest", which "wasn't always quite so easy to reconcile". Löw
said he had not hesitated "for one second" about including the two players in
his provisional 27-man squad.

Some journalists and rightwing politicians had called for Özil and Gündogan to
be kicked out of the national side. Sebastian Münzenmaier, an MP for the
rightwing nationalist Alternative für Deutschland, said unless the two players
stopped "flattering" the Turkish president, "the Turkish national side can look
forward to two new players". Football players cannot switch national teams after
they have represented one country at senior level.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              115 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 16, 2018 Wednesday 4:05 PM GMT

'Capricious': Donald Tusk condemns Trump administration;
European council president says US can no longer be relied upon after threat of
trade war

BYLINE: Daniel Boffey in Sofia

SECTION: WORLD NEWS; Version:3

LENGTH: 917 words


The threat posed by Donald Trump's administration has been likened to that of
China and Russia by Donald Tusk as he condemned the US's withdrawal from the
Iran deal and threat of a transatlantic trade war.

At the start of an EU summit in Bulgaria, the European council president offered
a withering condemnation of Trump's White House. He said: "We are witnessing
today a new phenomenon: the capricious assertiveness of the American
administration. Looking at the latest decisions of President Trump, some could
even think, 'With friends like that, who needs enemies?'"

Trump's decision to walk away from the nuclear deal with Iran - to which the UK,
France, Germany, Russia and China are co-signatories - is being linked by the EU
with the US administration's refusal to exempt the bloc from steel and aluminium
tariffs.

It was clear, Tusk suggested, that Washington could no longer be relied upon.

With member states yet to agree on how to handle the challenges, Tusk called on
leaders gathering in the Bulgarian capital, Sofia, to unite behind the tough
line being taken by key European actors in response to the White House's
actions.

Theresa May, Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel have resolved to stick with the
joint comprehensive plan of action with Iran, despite the threats of US
sanctions against European businesses.

The European commission is refusing to open talks on wider trade terms with the
US, including import tariffs on cars - a bugbear of the US president - until it
receives a permanent exemption from punitive taxes on European steel and
aluminium.

Before a dinner with EU leaders, including the UK's prime minister, Tusk said:
"I have no doubt that in the new global game, Europe will either be one of the
major players, or a pawn. This is the only real alternative. In order to be the
subject and not the object of global politics, Europe must be united
economically, politically and also militarily like never before. To put it
simply: either we are together, or we will not be at all.

"But, frankly speaking, Europe should be grateful by President Trump, because
thanks to him we have got rid of old illusions. He has made us realise that if
you need a helping hand, you will find one at the end of your arm.

"Europe must do everything in its power to protect - in spite of today's mood -
the transatlantic bond. But at the same time we must be prepared for those
scenarios where we have to act on our own."

Tusk said he wanted the 28 leaders over the next 24 hours to reconfirm that the
EU would stick to the deal as long as Iran did. "The deal is good for European
and global security, which is why we must maintain it," he said.

Tusk said the US appeared to be hesitating in hitting European companies doing
business in Iran with sanctions, but the bloc still needed to be ready to
protect its interests. It was crucial, he said, that the EU stuck to its guns
and refused to talk trade with the US until it received a permanent exemption
from punitive tariffs on steel and aluminium imposed by Washington on the
grounds of national security.

"The EU and US are friends and partners, therefore US tariffs cannot be
justified on the basis of national security," he said. "It is absurd to even
think that the EU could be a threat to the US. We need to bring back reality in
this discussion, which is not the case today."

A slew of companies, including French firm Total, have announced that they will
end their Iran contracts unless the US administration gives them a carve-out.
Referring to a major natural gas project in the Persian Gulf, Total said it
would "not be in a position to continue the South Pars project and will have to
unwind all related operations before 4 November 2018 unless Total is granted a
specific project waiver by the US authorities with the support of the French and
European authorities".

The Danish oil shipping company Torm also said it was pulling out of Iran, while
the container shipping line Swiss-based MSC also said on Wednesday it would stop
taking new bookings for Iran due to the US sanction decision.

The leaders of the EU member states are in Sofia to discuss the western Balkans
and digital innovation, but the agenda has been hijacked by the need to respond
to Trump.

Tusk will also be having a personal meeting with May on Thursday to discuss
Brexit, as concerns grow about the debate in the UK over the customs union. One
senior EU official described the scenes of the British cabinet openly debating
the way forward without a clear steer from May as shocking.

Meanwhile, the UK home secretary, Sajid Javid, has clashed with the European
parliament over his department's scheme for EU nationals seeking to stay in the
UK after Brexit. In a letter to Guy Verhofstadt, the parliament's Brexit
coordinator, in which Javid sought to reassure the former Belgian prime minister
that the system in the UK would be smooth and fair, the home secretary said the
27 other member states had so far failed to offer their plans for dealing with
British nationals.

"We are concerned that as yet we have seen little information about the
practical arrangements for securing their rights under the withdrawal
agreement," he wrote. "Is the European parliament able to provide any
reassurance about progress on equivalent arrangements for UK nationals? We are
discussing this issue with the commission and I would encourage you to press for
similar assurances to protect UK nationals."

Additional reporting by Patrick Wintour

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              116 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                              The Guardian(London)

                       May 16, 2018 Wednesday 5:59 AM GMT

Trump is wrong over Iran, but Europe can't afford to divorce the US;
No other US president has been as antagonistic to European principles. But
there's no alternative to a strong transatlantic partnership

BYLINE: Bruno Tertrais

SECTION: OPINION; Version:1

LENGTH: 1055 words


In 2003 a US-led war in the Middle East fractured western unity and divided the
European family. It was a trauma of historic proportions, a watershed in some
ways comparable to the 1956 Suez crisis. With Donald Trump's decision on Iran,
we may be on the verge of another such moment. On the surface, things may not
look as bad as they did in early 2003. At this point, US military action against
Iran is a worst-case hypothesis - not a plan. No 180,000-strong force is being
built up near Iranian territory. Nor are Europeans split into two camps. In this
current crisis, and despite Brexit, Europeans look like they're sticking
together.

Trump's decision is not only extraordinarily brutal, it affects a project whose
origins are found in a European initiative taken in the autumn of 2003, when the
UK, France and Germany sent their foreign ministers to Tehran for talks: that
project was aimed at limiting and controlling Iran's nuclear programme through
peaceful means. It took 12 years of international diplomacy, in which Europe
played an important role, to reach the nuclear deal that Trump has now decided
to tear up.

Make no mistake, the first country ?to benefit from a breakup between the US and
Europe would be authoritarian Russia

This US move amounts to an open assault on multilateralism - something that, as
history has taught us, Europeans have an existential interest in protecting and
upholding. Trump's decision can only be an own goal. US credibility will be
severely affected. When a German chancellor declares - as Angela Merkel has just
done, for the second time in a year - that Europe can no longer rely on the
United States, you know something is amiss. Many others will now ask: how can we
ever again trust a country that can withdraw overnight from solemn international
agreements?

This could end badly. When Trump realises his strategy is bound to fail, he may
want to resort to military force. His decision on Iran comes after a year and a
half of insults, disparaging comments, and decisions that run counter to
European and western interests. He cares little about Nato, and believes the US
isn't getting a fair return on its investment in European security. He has
withdrawn from the Paris climate agreement, and has imposed tariffs on steel and
aluminium.

So is it time for Europe to seek a divorce from the US? Well, not quite. For
several reasons, we should refrain from entering into confrontation. Europe may
be the largest trade bloc in the world, but in truth it does not have the
capacity to tackle 21st-century challenges on its own, and it would have even
less capacity to do so if its relationship with the US came fully apart.

There is simply no alternative to a strong transatlantic partnership. There is
no available spare superpower with which Europeans would share enough interests
to build a new form of alliance: China and Russia offer no such thing. Besides,
transatlantic flows of trade and capital stand at the heart of the global
economy, and they are irreplaceable.

Another reason to maintain a partnership with the US is the magnitude of the
security risks Europe faces. Islamic State might be militarily defeated, but
jihadist terrorism is a generational challenge: we cannot afford to turn our
backs on cooperation with the US. The trauma of terrorist attacks in Europe
remains vivid.

And then there is Vladimir Putin's Russia, a regime challenging our continent's
security and actively seeking, through various means, to weaken and divide
Europe and the west. Make no mistake, the first country to benefit from a
breakup between the US and Europe is authoritarian Russia.

Certainly, US-Europe relations are now entering troubled, uncharted waters. But
this could be a phase. Trump will be there for another three or seven years. But
by historical standards, that's a short period of time. The US is a vibrant and
innovative economy with a dynamic, multicultural population, and is an
optimistic society that cherishes individual freedom. That won't go away. We
need to think about the future.

For us Europeans, today's choices are difficult and there are real dilemmas.
Building European unity is the first imperative. Some member states of the EU -
especially in the central and eastern parts of the continent- may perhaps be
tempted to give a nod to President Trump for tactical purposes - as a
downpayment for US security protection. But that would be a miscalculation, as
European discord would benefit only Russia.

We need to be firm with Washington. The nuclear deal, or what remains of it,
needs to be supported. If it collapses entirely, that should not be because of
us. Trump has taken an extraordinary gamble, and we in Europe would be the
first, outside the Middle East, to suffer the consequences if yet more chaos and
war erupts. Our least bad option is to show we're ready to do what we can to
preserve the 2015 deal. We need to mitigate the impact of US sanctions on
European business.

Our limitations are, however, rather obvious. Europe can't afford a
transatlantic trade war. Its companies and banks do much more business on the
other side of the Atlantic than they will ever do with Iran. If anything, this
crisis should bolster calls to build up Europe's defence capabilities. We should
think of that ambition as a win-win proposition: as both a way of dispelling US
statements saying we refuse to carry our share of the security burden, and as
insurance that protects us against further erratic behaviour from Washington.

Since 1945 the transatlantic relationship has been the bedrock of Europe's
economy and its security. One should tread carefully with that legacy. No other
US president has ever been as antagonistic towards Europe and towards the
principles it defends. The American people elected Trump as president, so we
have to respect that. But what we don't have to respect are the decisions he
takes that have negative consequences for everyone, ourselves included.

In 2003 my country, France, staunchly opposed the Iraq war , alongside Germany -
but they were entirely unable to prevent it. Now Europeans have to find a way to
mitigate the destructiveness coming out of the White House; but we must also be
clear-eyed about what our capacities truly are.

· Bruno Tertrais is deputy director of the French thinktank Fondation pour la
recherche stratégique

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBGNS


  Copyright 2018 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved

                              117 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Ireland

Europe's stand against Putin has begun to crumble

BYLINE: Roger Boyes

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 854 words


Pushing their way to the front of the crowd at Vladimir Putin's inaugural
address in the Kremlin this month were the usual suspects: the Orthodox
patriarch Archbishop Kirill, defence minister Sergei Shoigu, ex-Stasi officer
Matthias Warnig and Steven Seagal, the Hollywood action hero who starred in
Above the Law. At the vanguard of this ghoulish fan club was the former German
chancellor Gerhard Schröder. Since the end of his political career he has
enjoyed senior roles in the Russian energy sector. Predictably, he was the first
to grasp the hand that feeds him.

The whole crew should be placed on a sanctions blacklist targeting over-zealous
and self-interested cheerleaders for the Putin regime that has annexed land in
Europe, supplied heavy arms to separatists, been complicit in the shooting down
of a civilian airliner, manipulated elections and used nerve agents against
residents in an EU country.

Why should we care about Putin's court? Because the Skripal consensus - the
tacit western agreement that the Russian poisoning of the defector Sergei
Skripal was a civilisational breach - is crumbling. Britain secured a diplomatic
breakthrough in swiftly winning over Nato and EU members to engage in a
collective expulsion of Putin's diplomats. Kicking out an envoy became a matter
of western self-identification. More than 130 have been sent home.

Now, though, many western countries want to open the door to Putin again.
Britain, in its determination to make a stand on the Skripal case, looks as if
it could be left isolated. Take the likely new Italian government, a coalition
of the extreme right-winger Matteo Salvini's Lega and the populist Five Star
Movement. Salvini has signed a "co-operation" deal with Putin's United Russia
party, vehemently opposes the renewal of sanctions against Moscow and spoke out
against the Italian expulsion of diplomats. There's not much doubt that his
government will do its best to end Putin's pariah status.

Austria chose not to expel Russian diplomats . It says it wants to build not
burn bridges with Moscow. In the recently re-elected president of the Czech
Republic, Milos Zeman, the Kremlin leader has another friend, one who calls
sanctions "destructive and ineffective". One of his prime goals is to gain
Russian backing for the expansion of the Czech nuclear energy network. Whether
it is the "illiberal" central European states (Poland excepted), EU members with
a deep dependency on Russian gas, or countries such as Greece and Cyprus which
pursue Russian investments, there is not much private enthusiasm for sticking
with Britain's hard line.

That has to be part of the reasoning behind the decision to let Andrew Parker,
director-general of the Security Service, speak publicly abroad for the first
time, at a conference in Berlin. He made a plea for a strong, continuing
intelligencesharing relationship after Brexit. It was also a reminder of the
common threat from Russia which, he said, had offered a "fog of lies,
half-truths and obfuscation" after the attack on the Skripals. The audience was
wellchosen. When the Skripal case broke in March, German politicians were among
the most vocal in demanding further evidence before committing reluctantly to
collective action. Even the German intelligence chiefs tended to see Skripal as
a former British asset and therefore a British problem.

It is primarily Germany that has to be convinced of the need to stay firm on
Putin. The litmus of the relationship is the gas pipeline Nord Stream 2 that is
intended to run directly from Russia to Germany, thus bypassing Ukraine. This is
a big strategic prize for the Kremlin. Gerhard Schröder and close Social
Democrat associates like the outgoing foreign minister Sigmar Gabriel and the
current German president Frank-Walter Steinmeier argue that Russia is a reliable
supplier of gas and so by piping it through the Baltic they are making European
energy supply more secure. All three men regard sanctions against Russia as
counter-productive.

The new German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, is attempting to harden the tone on
Putin but is hitting a wall of resistance. The composition of the German
parliament favours a rehabilitation of Putin. Angela Merkel's Christian
Democrats are broadly behind her sceptical approach to the Kremlin. Their
Bavarian sister party, CSU, however, has an eye on the many small businesses
that profit from Russian trade. Many Social Democrats agree with the Schröder
line, even if they don't much like the way he has made his fortune on Putin's
coat-tails. The left-wing radicals in the Linke party know how many east German
jobs are dependent on refining Russian oil and on the gas pipelines. The
far-right Alternative for Germany cannot hide its admiration for Putin and
contempt for Donald Trump.

Somehow, it has fallen to Britain to convince its European allies that opening
up to a malign autocrat in the Kremlin while they turn their back on the US
administration that pays the bulk of the West's defence costs is wrong-headed.
Let's make the arguments with more gusto.

There is not much enthusiasm for sticking with Britain's hard line

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              118 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                National Edition

Europe's stand against Putin is crumbling;
Britain risks isolation as Skripal case is quickly forgotten and pro-Kremlin
cronies gain influence

BYLINE: Roger Boyes

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 918 words


Pushing their way to the front of the crowd at Vladimir Putin's inaugural
address in the Kremlin earlier this month were the usual suspects: the Orthodox
patriarch Archbishop Kirill, defence minister Sergei Shoigu, ex-Stasi officer
Matthias Warnig and Steven Seagal, the American action hero who starred in Above
the Law. At the vanguard of this ghoulish fan club was the former German
chancellor Gerhard Schröder. Since the end of his political career he has
enjoyed senior roles in the Russian energy sector.

Predictably, he was the first to grasp the hand of the man who feeds him.

The whole crew should be placed on a new sanctions blacklist targeting
over-zealous and self-interested cheerleaders for the Putin regime that has
annexed land in Europe, supplied heavy arms to separatists, been complicit in
the shooting down of a civilian airliner, manipulated elections across the world
and used nerve agents against residents in an EU country.

Why should we care about Putin's court? Because the Skripal consensus - the
tacit western agreement that the Russian poisoning of the defector Sergei
Skripal was a civilisational breach - is crumbling. Britain secured a notable
diplomatic breakthrough in swiftly winning over Nato and EU members to engage in
a collective expulsion of Putin's diplomats. Kicking out an envoy became a
matter of western self-identification. More than 130 have been sent home.

Now, though, many western countries want to open the door again to Putin.
Britain, in its determination to make a stand on the Skripal case, looks as if
it could be left isolated. Take the likely new Italian government, a coalition
of the extreme right-winger Matteo Salvini's Lega and the populist Five Star
Movement. Salvini has signed a "co-operation" deal with Putin's United Russia
party, vehemently opposes the renewal of sanctions against Moscow and spoke out
against the Italian expulsion of diplomats. There's not much doubt that his
government will do its best to end Putin's pariah status.

Austria chose not to expel Russian diplomats and resists any expansion of
sanctions. It says it wants to build not burn bridges with Moscow. In the
recently re-elected president of the Czech Republic, Milos Zeman, the Kremlin
leader has another friend, one who calls sanctions "destructive and
ineffective". One of his prime goals is to gain Russian backing for the
expansion of the Czech nuclear energy network. Whether it is the "illiberal"
central European states (Poland excepted), EU members with a deep dependency on
Russian gas, or countries like Greece and Cyprus which pursue major Russian
investments, there is not much private enthusiasm for sticking with Britain in
its hard line.

That has to be part of the reasoning behind the decision to let Andrew Parker,
director-general of the Security Service, speak publicly abroad for the first
time, at a conference in Berlin. He made a plea for a strong, continuing
intelligencesharing relationship after Brexit. It was also a reminder of the
common threat from the Russian authorities which, he said, had offered a "fog of
lies, half-truths and obfuscation" after the attack on the Skripals. The
audience was well-chosen. When the Skripal case broke in March, German
politicians were among the most vocal in demanding further evidence of Russian
involvement before committing reluctantly to collective action. Even the German
intelligence chiefs tended to see Skripal as a former British asset and
therefore a British problem.

It is primarily Germany that has to be convinced of the need to stay firm on
Putin. The litmus of the relationship is the gas pipeline, Nord Stream 2, that
is intended to run directly from Russia to Germany, thus bypassing Ukraine. This
is a big strategic prize for the Kremlin. Gerhard Schröder and close Social
Democrat associates like the outgoing foreign minister Sigmar Gabriel and the
current German president (a former chief of staff to Schröder) Frank-Walter
Steinmeier argue that Russia is a reliable supplier of gas and so by piping it
through the Baltic they are making European energy supply more secure. All three
men regard sanctions against Russia as counter-productive.

The new German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, is attempting to harden the tone on
Putin but is hitting a brick wall of resistance. The composition of the German
parliament favours a rehabilitation of Putin. Angela Merkel's Christian
Democrats are broadly behind her sceptical approach to the Kremlin. Their
Bavarian sister party, CSU, however, has an eye on the many small businesses
that profit from Russian trade. Many Social Democrats agree with the Schröder
line, even if they don't much like the way he has made his fortune on Putin's
coat-tails. The left-wing radicals in the Linke party know how many east German
jobs are dependent on refining Russian oil and on the gas pipelines. The
far-right Alternative for Germany cannot hide its admiration for Putin and
contempt for Donald Trump.

Of all Germany's many foreign policy debates, the one about Russia has the
nastiest edge. It is a little reminiscent of the Cambridge Union motion in 1932:
"This house sees more hope in Moscow than Detroit." Somehow, it has fallen to
Britain to convince its European allies that opening up to a malign autocrat in
the Kremlin while they turn their back on the US administration that pays the
bulk of the West's defence costs is wrong-headed. Let's make the arguments with
more gusto.

There is not much enthusiasm for sticking with Britain's hard line

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                              119 of 119 DOCUMENTS



                               The Times (London)

                             May 16, 2018 Wednesday
                                   Edition 1;
                                    Scotland

Europe's stand against Putin is crumbling;
Britain risks isolation as Skripal case is quickly forgotten and pro-Kremlin
cronies gain influence

BYLINE: Roger Boyes

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 918 words


Pushing their way to the front of the crowd at Vladimir Putin's inaugural
address in the Kremlin earlier this month were the usual suspects: the Orthodox
patriarch Archbishop Kirill, defence minister Sergei Shoigu, ex-Stasi officer
Matthias Warnig and Steven Seagal, the American action hero who starred in Above
the Law. At the vanguard of this ghoulish fan club was the former German
chancellor Gerhard Schröder. Since the end of his political career he has
enjoyed senior roles in the Russian energy sector.

Predictably, he was the first to grasp the hand of the man who feeds him.

The whole crew should be placed on a new sanctions blacklist targeting
over-zealous and self-interested cheerleaders for the Putin regime that has
annexed land in Europe, supplied heavy arms to separatists, been complicit in
the shooting down of a civilian airliner, manipulated elections across the world
and used nerve agents against residents in an EU country.

Why should we care about Putin's court? Because the Skripal consensus - the
tacit western agreement that the Russian poisoning of the defector Sergei
Skripal was a civilisational breach - is crumbling. Britain secured a notable
diplomatic breakthrough in swiftly winning over Nato and EU members to engage in
a collective expulsion of Putin's diplomats. Kicking out an envoy became a
matter of western self-identification. More than 130 have been sent home.

Now, though, many western countries want to open the door again to Putin.
Britain, in its determination to make a stand on the Skripal case, looks as if
it could be left isolated. Take the likely new Italian government, a coalition
of the extreme right-winger Matteo Salvini's Lega and the populist Five Star
Movement. Salvini has signed a "co-operation" deal with Putin's United Russia
party, vehemently opposes the renewal of sanctions against Moscow and spoke out
against the Italian expulsion of diplomats. There's not much doubt that his
government will do its best to end Putin's pariah status.

Austria chose not to expel Russian diplomats and resists any expansion of
sanctions. It says it wants to build not burn bridges with Moscow. In the
recently re-elected president of the Czech Republic, Milos Zeman, the Kremlin
leader has another friend, one who calls sanctions "destructive and
ineffective". One of his prime goals is to gain Russian backing for the
expansion of the Czech nuclear energy network. Whether it is the "illiberal"
central European states (Poland excepted), EU members with a deep dependency on
Russian gas, or countries like Greece and Cyprus which pursue major Russian
investments, there is not much private enthusiasm for sticking with Britain in
its hard line.

That has to be part of the reasoning behind the decision to let Andrew Parker,
director-general of the Security Service, speak publicly abroad for the first
time, at a conference in Berlin. He made a plea for a strong, continuing
intelligencesharing relationship after Brexit. It was also a reminder of the
common threat from the Russian authorities which, he said, had offered a "fog of
lies, half-truths and obfuscation" after the attack on the Skripals. The
audience was well-chosen. When the Skripal case broke in March, German
politicians were among the most vocal in demanding further evidence of Russian
involvement before committing reluctantly to collective action. Even the German
intelligence chiefs tended to see Skripal as a former British asset and
therefore a British problem.

It is primarily Germany that has to be convinced of the need to stay firm on
Putin. The litmus of the relationship is the gas pipeline, Nord Stream 2, that
is intended to run directly from Russia to Germany, thus bypassing Ukraine. This
is a big strategic prize for the Kremlin. Gerhard Schröder and close Social
Democrat associates like the outgoing foreign minister Sigmar Gabriel and the
current German president (a former chief of staff to Schröder) Frank-Walter
Steinmeier argue that Russia is a reliable supplier of gas and so by piping it
through the Baltic they are making European energy supply more secure. All three
men regard sanctions against Russia as counter-productive.

The new German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, is attempting to harden the tone on
Putin but is hitting a brick wall of resistance. The composition of the German
parliament favours a rehabilitation of Putin. Angela Merkel's Christian
Democrats are broadly behind her sceptical approach to the Kremlin. Their
Bavarian sister party, CSU, however, has an eye on the many small businesses
that profit from Russian trade. Many Social Democrats agree with the Schröder
line, even if they don't much like the way he has made his fortune on Putin's
coat-tails. The left-wing radicals in the Linke party know how many east German
jobs are dependent on refining Russian oil and on the gas pipelines. The
far-right Alternative for Germany cannot hide its admiration for Putin and
contempt for Donald Trump.

Of all Germany's many foreign policy debates, the one about Russia has the
nastiest edge. It is a little reminiscent of the Cambridge Union motion in 1932:
"This house sees more hope in Moscow than Detroit." Somehow, it has fallen to
Britain to convince its European allies that opening up to a malign autocrat in
the Kremlin while they turn their back on the US administration that pays the
bulk of the West's defence costs is wrong-headed. Let's make the arguments with
more gusto.

There is not much enthusiasm for sticking with Britain's hard line

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2018

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: TIM


                    Copyright 2018 Times Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
